[Amit Varma]: How do we judge a political party? One way of doing so would be to see how well it governs
[Amit Varma]: when it is in power. By this yardstick, all our parties have failed. India has been misgoverned
[Amit Varma]: throughout the last 74 years, barring brief happy accidents like the liberalisation of
[Amit Varma]: 1991. Bad economic policies have kept millions of people in poverty for decades longer than
[Amit Varma]: should have been the case. Our social ruptures have not been healed. If anything, they've
[Amit Varma]: become worse and new fault lines have sprung up. But perhaps judging a party on governance
[Amit Varma]: is not fair. It ignores their incentives. A party's incentives are simply to win elections.
[Amit Varma]: People don't vote on the basis of governance, but on the basis of narratives. Our parties
[Amit Varma]: have been brilliant at creating narratives, building vote banks, constructing election
[Amit Varma]: machines of staggering complexity and equally staggering efficiency. And it's so fascinating
[Amit Varma]: to take a look inside these machines at the nuts and bolts of our great democracy.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Scene and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioural
[Amit Varma]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and The Unseen. My guest today is Shivam Shankar Singh, author of two
[Amit Varma]: books, How to Win an Indian Election, which came out in 2019 and just released The Art
[Amit Varma]: of Conjuring Alternate Realities, co-written with Anand Venkat Narayan. Shivam's career
[Amit Varma]: graph is fascinating. He was studying economics in the US a decade ago when he got interested
[Amit Varma]: in Indian politics. The India Against Corruption movement filled him with hope and given how
[Amit Varma]: bad the government of the day was, he saw Narendra Modi as a way out. He joined the
[Amit Varma]: BJP in 2013 and went to see Modi's parliamentary campaign in Varanasi in 2014 from up close.
[Amit Varma]: He then did a LAMP fellowship, getting deeper insights into how parliament works, or often
[Amit Varma]: doesn't work. He then took his data analytics skill to be a backroom boy for the political
[Amit Varma]: consultant Prashant Kishore. He did a ton of work at the grassroots, getting Amrindar
[Amit Varma]: Singh elected in Punjab in 2017, rebranding him from Maharaj to Captain. He then realised
[Amit Varma]: that political consultants were just glorified event managers and decided he would learn
[Amit Varma]: more by working within a political party. He helped run the BJP's campaign in Manipur
[Amit Varma]: and Tripura, harnessing new media to do micro-targeting of voters. Then he realised that the BJP didn't
[Amit Varma]: really care about development, all that was rhetoric and he saw the extent of their divisive
[Amit Varma]: politics. He quit the party. He even wrote a post about why he quit the party which then
[Amit Varma]: went viral. Most importantly for us, he wrote his excellent book, How to Win an Indian Election,
[Amit Varma]: which is so full of deep insights about the nitty-gritties of how our parties run elections.
[Amit Varma]: His new book, The Art of Conjuring Alternate Realities, is full of the nitty-gritties of
[Amit Varma]: how narratives are constructed and why we believe them. I'm sure you'll find this conversation
[Amit Varma]: as fascinating as I did. But before we begin, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Do you want to read more? I've put in a lot of work in recent years in building a reading
[Amit Varma]: habit. This means that I read more books, but I also read more long-form articles and
[Amit Varma]: essays. There's a world of knowledge available through the internet. But the problem we all
[Amit Varma]: face is, how do we navigate this knowledge? How do we know what to read? How do we put
[Amit Varma]: the right incentives in place? Well, I discovered one way. A couple of friends of mine run this
[Amit Varma]: awesome company called CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com, which aims to help people up-level themselves
[Amit Varma]: by reading more. A few months ago, I signed up for one of their programs called The Daily
[Amit Varma]: Reader. Every day for six months, they sent me a long-form article to read. The subjects
[Amit Varma]: covered went from machine learning to mythology to mental models and marmalade. This helped
[Amit Varma]: me build a habit of reading. At the end of every day, I understood the world a little
[Amit Varma]: better than I did before. So if you want to build your reading habit, head on over to
[Amit Varma]: CTQ Compounds and check out their Daily Reader. New batches start every month. They also have
[Amit Varma]: a great program called Future Stack, which helps you stay up-to-date with ideas, skills,
[Amit Varma]: and mental models that will help you stay relevant in the future. Future Stack batches
[Amit Varma]: start every Saturday. Also, check out their Social Capital Compound, which helps you master
[Amit Varma]: social media. What's more, you get a discount of a whopping 2,500 rupees, 2,500 if you use
[Amit Varma]: the discount code UNSEEN. So head on over to CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com and use
[Amit Varma]: the code UNSEEN. Up-level yourself.
[Amit Varma]: Shivam, welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you. Absolutely amazing to be here.
[Amit Varma]: Reading both your wonderful books, both of which I learned so much from, one of the things
[Amit Varma]: that struck me is that your career trajectory would have been impossible a decade ago, like
[Amit Varma]: a decade before you came into this, you know, Indian politics is just kind of evolved to
[Amit Varma]: the state where if one may say that a well educated person like you can come back from
[Amit Varma]: the US and dive headlong into it and actually be part of a lot of what is changing. But
[Amit Varma]: before we get there, tell me a little bit about your life before politics, like you
[Amit Varma]: did a Bachelor of Science and Economics from Michigan Ann Arbor. What was your, you know,
[Amit Varma]: notion of yourself like when you were growing up? What did you want to do? What did you
[Guest]: want to be?
[Guest]: So I was actually born and grew up in Delhi itself, went to DPS RK Param. For 11th and
[Guest]: 12th, I actually went to a very interesting school called Mahindra United World College
[Guest]: of India. And UWCs are a global chain of like schools across the world. There were 14 when
[Guest]: I was there, I believe there are 18 now. And when you go there, they almost guarantee you
[Guest]: a scholarship to 97 US universities, if you get admitted to any of them. So I found out
[Guest]: that something like this existed, always really wanted to study the US and realize that this
[Guest]: is an excellent opportunity. So did that. While I was in the US, I've always been interested
[Guest]: in politics. But while I was in the US was when the India against corruption movement
[Guest]: started, when the 2g scam happened, the Colgate scam came into the news, all of these political
[Guest]: developments that were happening and the momentum that was getting built. For the first time
[Guest]: in my life, I saw absolutely non political people give up everything and enter the political
[Guest]: frame, not in direct electoral politics, but a lot of people who are friends of mine, even
[Guest]: relatives of mine went to India gate with Indian flags sang the national anthem there
[Guest]: with the entire India against corruption movement. They were looking for a change. In this political
[Guest]: climate, I believe a major transformation was taking place in the country. What also
[Guest]: happened and you correctly pointed it out, the space for a young person to contribute
[Guest]: in politics wasn't there a decade ago. But that space opened up with the onslaught of
[Guest]: digital technologies, data analytics coming into the fray, and becoming extremely important
[Guest]: for elections. So I knew a lot of young people who were working for major consultancy firms,
[Guest]: KPMG, Bain McKinsey, major banks, who actually quit their jobs and came to support BJP's
[Guest]: campaign at that point of time, just because of the political climate then. And the climate
[Guest]: was essentially that the current incumbent government of UPA needed to go because of
[Guest]: all of the scams that had happened because of the policy paralysis talk. And because
[Guest]: Narendra Modi came with a very successful Gujarat model on how business would transform
[Guest]: India how the country would transform and benefit young people in the future going forward.
[Guest]: So all of these people essentially came to the BJP and talk to different leaders talk
[Guest]: to whoever they could get a hold of, and basically asked that, okay, we want to contribute to
[Guest]: the election campaign, how do we go about it? Interestingly, the place to do this did
[Guest]: not exist. A lot of politicians first took on these young educated people with themselves.
[Guest]: And then they realized that it's entirely useless to keep these people in their cars
[Guest]: and take them from one rally to the next. And that is how Prashant Kishore came into
[Guest]: the scene, because he was already working with Narendra Modi in Gujarat. And he was
[Guest]: given the responsibility to create an entity which could house all of these young people,
[Guest]: not entirely headed, but at least structured. And that was how CAG, Citizens for Accountable
[Guest]: Governance came to be as a nonprofit. And all of these young people, everyone got paid
[Guest]: like small amounts, but it was insignificant. People came there because they really wanted
[Guest]: to contribute. In this political climate while I was in the US, I also started working on
[Guest]: the social media initiatives of the BJP, supporting their campaign online, did a little bit of
[Guest]: work with overseas friends of BJP. All of this while it was happening, I realized that
[Guest]: okay, India really is opening up. And a lot of people around me were extremely hopeful,
[Guest]: especially when the 2014 change of government happened. People believe the nation is going
[Guest]: to transform. And just being a part of it seems like a very important thing to do. So
[Guest]: I started exploring opportunities. What is it that I can do after college that gets me
[Guest]: engaged in direct politics, but more than that, to get me to understand the political
[Guest]: system of the country, understand how laws are made, understand how institutions are
[Guest]: structured. And that is when I came about and found the LAMP fellowship, which is Legislative
[Guest]: Assistant to Member of Parliament, a very interesting fellowship run by an entity called
[Guest]: PRS Legislative Research. They select 50 to 55 people every year and then place them with
[Guest]: a Member of Parliament for 11 months. So you get to work in the Indian Parliament with
[Guest]: an MP who has seen the entire political process for the last decade, two decades, and has
[Guest]: actually contested elections, won elections, and is now working on framing the country's
[Guest]: laws. So that just seemed like an opportunity that really interested me. So I came back
[Guest]: from the US right after graduation. Thankfully, I'd applied to the LAMP fellowship and gotten
[Guest]: in by then. So that decision became slightly easier, came back, joined it for 11 months.
[Guest]: During this process, a couple of very interesting things happened that pushed me into direct
[Guest]: electoral politics. That wasn't actually the plan. My plan, very similar to a lot of people's
[Guest]: plan in CAG, was to actually work on governance and to work on strengthening institutions.
[Guest]: But what CAG and everyone who worked there realized right after 2014 elections, I realized
[Guest]: after the LAMP fellowship. The space to get engaged in policy is a lot more limited than
[Guest]: the space to get engaged in politics. And when you work in direct electoral politics,
[Guest]: especially on things like marketing, digital media, social media campaigning, data analytics,
[Guest]: constituency profiling surveys, if you create good content, if you create solid research,
[Guest]: which is backed by data and facts, it is more highly regarded in the political domain than
[Guest]: it is in the policy domain. Because policy more or less still runs on gut feeling, which
[Guest]: was very surprising to me, but it's like someone in some layer of the hierarchy thought this
[Guest]: is a good idea, so they will do it. They don't really count on collecting data and information,
[Guest]: but the exact same politicians who will make policy decisions on gut feeling want data
[Guest]: and specifics and research backed facts when it comes to elections. And during the LAMP
[Guest]: fellowship, we did a lot of data work on parliamentary data. And a lot of people don't know this,
[Guest]: but the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha website are a goldmine of data. You can access every
[Guest]: debate that has taken place in the Indian Parliament. You can access every question
[Guest]: that has been asked in the Indian Parliament. And we realised there was something wrong
[Guest]: in the process of parliamentary questions that were being asked. So we basically pulled
[Guest]: out the data for the 16th Lok Sabha, about 1000-1500 questions that were asked by different
[Guest]: MPs. And then we ran some analysis on it. And we statistically proved that the question
[Guest]: selection system was not fair. Some MPs were getting way more questions selected than other
[Guest]: MPs. And it was happening because they were cartelising together and asking the same questions.
[Guest]: We researched and found out how the process was working. But we did not put that in the
[Guest]: article. We just wrote on the statistics of it all. When that happened, a lot of politicians
[Guest]: tweeted it out. Dr. Sashi Tharoor was one of the first ones who picked up the article
[Guest]: and tweeted it out and it went kind of viral. And that's how I got my start in politics.
[Guest]: Because people realised that, okay, there is this young person who is doing something
[Guest]: related to data in politics and policy. And that's how I got into IPAC, Indian Political
[Guest]: Action Committee. That's the company that Prashant Kishore runs. Stayed there for a
[Guest]: while. But what I realised was Prashant Kishore's strength is branding and building the image
[Guest]: of a leader. He does excellent events. He is a genius at branding a politician. But
[Guest]: the data work that was happening at BJP was far superior to what any other entity in the
[Guest]: country was doing. And which is something that is still true. So people in BJP got in
[Guest]: touch with me and I got in touch with them. We discussed what could be done. And at that
[Guest]: point of time, BJP did not really exist in the North East and they were just expanding.
[Guest]: And they asked me to come on board, help with the North East campaigns, especially because
[Guest]: no one had expertise or domain knowledge in the North East within the BJP itself. No one
[Guest]: understood the tribes there. No one understood the culture there. No one had prior prepared
[Guest]: data on that region of the country. People didn't even have digitised electoral rolls
[Guest]: for that part. So it was entirely a fresh operation. So they were willing to get new
[Guest]: people on board who would start and build this up. So I joined BJP. Did that till mid
[Guest]: 2018. That is when things started changing for me personally. During 2017-18, it started
[Guest]: becoming clear that the development narrative was slipping away. If you look at the political
[Guest]: slogans, then BJP started with achche din aane wale hain. It started with bahut hui
[Guest]: mengai ki baar, ab ki baar Modi Sarkar. It started with Gujarat model, which was a very
[Guest]: development centric model. But in 2018, it became entirely clear to at least me within
[Guest]: the party and a lot of people with me, that 2019 is not going to be a campaign centred
[Guest]: around development. And a couple of leaders explicitly told us so too, that if you contest
[Guest]: one election on development, and you contest the next one on development, you have to justify
[Guest]: your development track record. But if you shift it to an emotional issue, then whatever
[Guest]: your development track record might be, you don't need to justify it. You've completely
[Guest]: shifted people's attention to a new agenda and a new issue. And that was the plan for
[Guest]: 2019. So I heard that plan and was kind of surprised and depressed at the same time.
[Guest]: And I realised that I couldn't be a part of it. So I told everyone quite politely that
[Guest]: okay, I am for everything that happens on the side of development. I've loved working
[Guest]: for the party because it's doing exceptional work in the data realm. But if the campaign
[Guest]: is going to be entirely around caste and religion and India and Pakistan and Hindu and Muslim,
[Guest]: then this is something that I don't feel comfortable doing. Surprisingly, a lot of people called
[Guest]: me up to ask, what happened? Why are you upset with the party? And it became such a frequent
[Guest]: occurrence that I ended up writing a blog post so that I could send people the link.
[Guest]: And then that blog post got picked up by pretty much like all the online media outlets, a
[Guest]: lot of different people and went viral. And that's how Penguin got in touch because no
[Guest]: one had written anything on what political consultants actually do in the country. Who
[Guest]: are these young people who suddenly come in and are doing some data stuff? They're doing
[Guest]: targeted messaging to people. And no one really understood this field. So an editor from Penguin
[Guest]: reached out to ask me to write on it. I thought it was a very interesting opportunity. And
[Guest]: I was also jobless then because I had just resigned from the VJP. So I had the time to
[Guest]: write it. Thankfully, the first book became a huge bestseller. And like a lot of people
[Guest]: knew who I was after that. So then I started my own company that works in political data
[Guest]: analytics and haven't had a dearth of work, mostly thanks to the book. I realized a lot
[Guest]: of the people who reached out to me to work on the elections because their son had read
[Guest]: the book, their brother had read the book and recommended me. So that's what I am doing
[Guest]: right now. There's another transition that's happened. I'm actually enrolled at a master's
[Guest]: program right now called Schwarzman Scholars. And it's based out of Tsinghua University
[Guest]: in Beijing, which is the university that the Chinese premier Xi Jinping studied at, Hu
[Guest]: Jintao studied at. And the program is run by the Blackstone Group based in the US. It's
[Guest]: 40 percent US scholars, 20 percent Chinese and 40 percent from across the globe. And
[Guest]: the idea is to get people together. It's a fully funded master's program for people to
[Guest]: understand China. The reason that I decided to do this was China became a more politically
[Guest]: relevant issue in India over the last one year. And I realized that the understanding
[Guest]: of China and India is actually very limited. We have some experts on the border. We have
[Guest]: some experts on the military and the PLA. But very few people understand Chinese culture,
[Guest]: the Chinese economy, the Chinese regions within themselves, the structure of the Chinese Communist
[Guest]: Party, just the way that the Chinese thought process within the population works, the Chinese
[Guest]: social media and the Internet, because it's completely different from the normal Internet.
[Guest]: So doing this program right now, because it's a politically relevant subject and also like
[Guest]: a really interesting subject to study China. That's wonderful. And in fact, I've done a
[Amit Varma]: bunch of episodes on China. And now that you've mentioned this, I'll save some questions for
[Amit Varma]: China for you as well at the end of it, because your perspectives in many ways seem to be
[Amit Varma]: different from what one otherwise hears. Now, what you've done in the last 10 minutes is
[Amit Varma]: you've given us this sort of pressy of a career that's much more interesting than these 10
[Amit Varma]: minutes indicate. So it's like a long passage with lots of hyperlinks. And what I'm going
[Amit Varma]: to do for the rest of this conversation is do a lot of double clicking on some of those
[Amit Varma]: hyperlinks and go in. I was struck by, you know, while reading your excellent first book,
[Amit Varma]: How to Win an Indian Election, when I take notes from a book, I have all these sort of
[Amit Varma]: different headings. And one of my headings was insights, because it was just so full
[Amit Varma]: of really interesting things, which, you know, were thought provoking for me, and I'm sure
[Amit Varma]: for my readers, and a couple of them, in fact, came up while you were speaking just now.
[Amit Varma]: And one, of course, is about how people within government do policy by gut feel and politics
[Amit Varma]: by data, which, you know, I'm sure the common perception of it is just the other way around
[Amit Varma]: that politics is gut feel and you're street smart, and you kind of know what works and
[Amit Varma]: policy will be data. But you're mentioning that as the other way around, especially saying
[Amit Varma]: that policy is gut feel is kind of startling to me. And that's also a fascinating rationale
[Amit Varma]: that you, you know, you mentioned that the leader from the BJP gave you that if you fight
[Amit Varma]: one election on development, to fight the next one also on development, you have to
[Amit Varma]: show the development. So we can't do that, which is excellent. I want to double click
[Amit Varma]: right at the start and talk about the young Shivam before politics. One of the fascinating
[Amit Varma]: things that I found that you wrote about your years in the US is how there was a hunger
[Amit Varma]: for Hindi content, that while you were there, you were constantly looking for news in Hindi
[Amit Varma]: things to read in Hindi, so on and so forth. Now, one trope that I have examined over the
[Amit Varma]: last 250 episodes, one thing I sometimes come back to is how different Indians understand
[Amit Varma]: this country differently, because of the language that they grow up reading in, like, I unfortunately
[Amit Varma]: am an English speaking elite. So I, you know, I can read and speak in Hindi, but as a habit,
[Amit Varma]: I'm consuming everything in English, that definitely restricts the view I have of the
[Amit Varma]: country. And this first came to me when I was chatting with a couple of earlier guests.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the contexts for that was this controversial old piece Ramchandra Guha wrote,
[Amit Varma]: and he's also been on the show many times, where Ram's thesis was that there are no right
[Amit Varma]: wing intellectuals you can respect in India. And that was something I tended to believe
[Amit Varma]: at one point in time, where I assumed that, you know, that what the right calls conservatism
[Amit Varma]: or whatever cloak they put on their philosophy is just a cover for innate bigotry, and there's
[Amit Varma]: nothing more there. And I found I was wrong. And I found I was wrong while speaking to
[Amit Varma]: people like Akshay Mukul, like Rahul Verma, the scholar based in Delhi, who will also
[Amit Varma]: be on my show soon, again. And, and I realised that they were people who grew up reading
[Amit Varma]: in Hindi. So they were aware of streams of thought, which English speaking elites like
[Amit Varma]: me weren't. So, you know, my broad question is that, do you feel that your consumption
[Amit Varma]: of material in Hindi, gave you a sense of what politics was in India, what society was
[Amit Varma]: in India, which your English speaking peers or those peers who grew up just reading in
[Amit Varma]: English may not necessarily have had, you know, are there differences in perspectives
[Amit Varma]: that came from that per se?
[Guest]: Oh, definitely. So I think language and the medium that you consume content in has a major
[Guest]: impact on your thought process. This also in a lot of ways connects to the second book
[Guest]: because it is on the reality that you live in, because all of us live in separate realities
[Guest]: based on the information that we get. If you're consuming just English information, your worldview
[Guest]: is very different from someone who's consuming just Hindi information. I am also an English
[Guest]: speaking elite in the sense that while I was in India, I mostly consumed English content.
[Guest]: When I was in the US, I realised that I'm losing touch with the language, because across
[Guest]: classes across your friends group, you're just speaking in English, all of the study
[Guest]: that you do is in English. So at that point, I made a concerted effort to consume Hindi
[Guest]: news, and at least read news in Hindi so that I could at least be connected to the language
[Guest]: and retain my reading and writing abilities. Because I also realised Hindi deteriorates
[Guest]: extremely fast, your reading speed in Hindi, if you don't read it for two years, three
[Guest]: years, just starts declining like exponentially. So to keep that alive, I started consuming
[Guest]: Hindi content. What I realised there, first of all, was that yes, there is an alternate
[Guest]: set of thoughts that exists. But there is also an alternate set of facts that exist.
[Guest]: If you look at reporting in Hindi and English, then the facts being presented to the audience
[Guest]: is very different from each other. So you would have different worldviews. Also an interesting
[Guest]: component of it is that even between these two languages, if you start going to the other
[Guest]: regional languages of India, the content gets even more specific. And that is why we have
[Guest]: states created on linguistic grounds, because the thought and culture of language is a part
[Guest]: of people's identity and thought process. So people who speak the same language and
[Guest]: consume the same content feel closer together in thought than other people who speak a different
[Guest]: language. And this, I believe, would continue to exist. And it's actually also increasing
[Guest]: now, because as we have a movement towards, say, nationalism and the English intellectuals
[Guest]: don't respect India, they are anti-India. As this narrative strengthens, people who
[Guest]: consume content in Hindi get more basically solidified in their own silos. And people
[Guest]: who consume content in English get solidified in their own silos. And politicians, especially
[Guest]: in the ruling party right now, absolutely love this. As little engagement as there is
[Guest]: between the two groups, the more solidified the content and the narrative and the silo
[Guest]: becomes. So it just serves their purpose. And somehow language in India hasn't presented
[Guest]: to be a barrier yet. We've always believed in unity and diversity. We've always believed
[Guest]: that multiple languages, multiple cultures, multiple thought process is a good thing.
[Guest]: But that seems to be transforming over the last few years. These things which India considered
[Guest]: to be a strength are now being exploited by political entities, by even other non-political
[Guest]: entities for their own purpose and their own gain. If you look at nationalism and Indic
[Guest]: pride right now, there are a lot of companies coming up who sell products based on that.
[Guest]: So it's not even just the politicians. There are social media companies that have been
[Guest]: created based on a spirit of nationalism that is essentially, OK, these foreign companies
[Guest]: where English is the main language is dominated by left liberal intellectuals. So you should
[Guest]: use us. So this language barrier is now also a political barrier. And it's also becoming
[Guest]: a cultural barrier. And it's becoming a divide where people with one linguistic consumption
[Guest]: habit actually dislike and distrust people with another linguistic habit. So this interesting
[Guest]: transformation will play out over the next few years. But it is something that's getting
[Guest]: more embedded and becoming scarier over time.
[Amit Varma]: And is this something that has changed and become more recent? Like I did an episode
[Amit Varma]: with Snigdha Poonam who wrote this excellent book called Dreamers about young India and
[Amit Varma]: young Indians. And one of the threads in that was that one thing she would find in small
[Amit Varma]: towns everywhere was this aspiration to learn English. So it was Hindi speakers who are
[Amit Varma]: not necessarily resenting those who know English and are part of the elite, but they want to
[Amit Varma]: join that elite and they want to learn English. And that's the whole game, you know, where
[Amit Varma]: English becomes a sort of a tool for signaling that you are on the move, that you're going
[Amit Varma]: from here to there, as it were, rather than just a sort of a medium of communication.
[Amit Varma]: Is that somewhat at odds with the sort of the resentment and the feeling of otherness
[Amit Varma]: that you're talking about now? Is this sort of this negative, more darker shade something
[Amit Varma]: that's come about maybe over the last decade?
[Guest]: So English has always been a tool for social mobility, and it's been a very easy means
[Guest]: to rise up the economic ladder. And this is true for most nations around the world. If
[Guest]: you move from the native language to English, you will do economically better, and your
[Guest]: future generations will do better because they will start learning the language from
[Guest]: a young age. So it has been a part of Indian aspiration. Higher education has been a part
[Guest]: of Indian aspiration. The value of secularism and liberality and a culture that adapts to
[Guest]: other cultures has been something that India's largely been proud of through much of its
[Guest]: history. All of these things, though, are being transformed into something of a weakness.
[Guest]: So when you look at the current politics, the goal is to make you feel bad about it.
[Guest]: It's about why do you want to learn English? These people who want to learn English want
[Guest]: to change your culture, want to take something away from you. And a large set of people are
[Guest]: now holding on to a value system where they would rather go to Hindi medium schools, rather
[Guest]: send their kids to Hindi medium schools, even though it's economically worse for them, because
[Guest]: it is a political statement. And they have come to believe that learning English and
[Guest]: transforming towards English is somehow selling out. And it is a message that our politicians
[Guest]: have tried to send to a large part of society. If you look at even people who went to foreign
[Guest]: universities, people who got great educations, it was a thing that generated respect across
[Guest]: society. But now there is a movement to deride and belittle it in the sense of statements
[Guest]: like hard work versus Howard, coming from top politicians of the nation, in the sense
[Guest]: of people stressing how anyone who goes to a good institution, even within the country,
[Guest]: if you look at something like JNU, Jawaharlal Nehru University has been one of the top educational
[Guest]: institutions in the country. If you look at Ashoka University, one of the better private
[Guest]: universities, all of these spaces of intellectuality and learning have been branded into something
[Guest]: negative, something that is against the nation, something that is anti-national, something
[Guest]: that will work against the interests of India. So there is a concerted attempt to make anything
[Guest]: progressive into a bad thing. And that also includes the English language.
[Amit Varma]: So what we see increasingly around us these days is a lot of regressive messaging from
[Amit Varma]: politicians of all hues, actually. For example, just recently there was that, I think, that
[Amit Varma]: politician whose clip went viral on YouTube, where he's saying that, you know, what is
[Amit Varma]: wrong with modern women? Why are they working? Why are they not getting married to us? Why
[Amit Varma]: are they not having kids and all of that? Leave alone the fact that our Prime Minister
[Amit Varma]: himself hasn't got married or had kids. But one can at least understand where that sentiment
[Amit Varma]: is coming from, because our society is misogynist and sexist, and they want to keep it that
[Amit Varma]: way. And obviously every Indian male who thinks like that is terrified of the empowered woman.
[Amit Varma]: So I get where that is coming from, reprehensible as it is. But, you know, this whole thing
[Amit Varma]: that I won't send my kid to an English school seems a little sort of bizarre to me. I mean,
[Amit Varma]: I did an episode with Sujata Anandan about Maharashtra politics, where she spoke at length
[Amit Varma]: about the Thakures. And the interesting thing about Bal Thakure was that he was a true believer.
[Amit Varma]: He wasn't just posturing. When he spoke out against English schools, he actually sent
[Amit Varma]: Uddhav to a Marathi medium school, for example, which could have, you know, turned Uddhav
[Amit Varma]: one way or the other. But it seems that he remained fairly sensible and didn't go down
[Amit Varma]: those extreme paths. So do you have any theories about why this is so? Because it seems to
[Amit Varma]: me like a clash between the individual self-interest and community pride, that your individual
[Amit Varma]: self-interest would dictate that you send your kids to an English medium school because
[Amit Varma]: they'll do better in life. And then one day, hopefully, they'll look after you better because
[Amit Varma]: they'll have more money. But instead, it's like, you know, apne hi pair pe kulhari kind
[Amit Varma]: of thing for this whole, you know, notion of community. And this keeps coming back to
[Amit Varma]: me again and again, because, like, I am someone who values individual rights above all, you
[Amit Varma]: know, to me, if you think in terms of groups, that's toxic, that's dangerous, that completely
[Amit Varma]: goes against individual freedom as well. But there are many people who, you know, obviously
[Amit Varma]: take the contrary view, not just in an abstract sense when it comes to other people, but even
[Amit Varma]: when it comes to themselves. So I can't understand this. But what are your thoughts?
[Guest]: So let me start out by saying that most people, the vast majority still work based on self-interest.
[Guest]: If they have the opportunity and the funds, they will still send their kids to the best
[Guest]: school that they can. It will most likely be an English medium school, likely CBSE or
[Guest]: ICSE and not the state boards. Those hierarchies still remain very much so. And that encompasses
[Guest]: the vast majority of the nation. But what is happening is that a vocal fringe is coming
[Guest]: about. And if you look at it in terms of other nations or other ethnic groups, then we've
[Guest]: seen this within Islam, say, for a very long time, where there is a push to send the young
[Guest]: kids to madarsas instead of sending them to private schools. If you look at a nation like
[Guest]: Afghanistan that has just fallen to the Taliban now, they would much rather have the entire
[Guest]: population study religious scriptures than study science and mathematics and humanities
[Guest]: and arts. So this is a thing that exists in most tribalistic societies, in most tribalistic
[Guest]: cultures, where the fringe, when it comes to power, does not want people going to institutions
[Guest]: of learning, which will expand your thought process. It wants you and your kids to be
[Guest]: in a place which restricts your thought process, which takes you back to something thousands
[Guest]: of years ago. And you start seeing something that is old and ancient as a great and glorious
[Guest]: time period and the current as something that is bad that has come about because of the
[Guest]: other side who is trying to liberalise, who is trying to bring in Western values, trying
[Guest]: to bring in external things into your life. You start hankering for a past that you haven't
[Guest]: lived in because it existed thousands of years ago. This group has started emerging within
[Guest]: Hindu India. It did not for a very long time and the aspirations of all of India were basically
[Guest]: concentrated around economic development and prosperity and growth. But this recentering
[Guest]: that has happened, there are a couple of reasons for it. The politics of Indic nationalism
[Guest]: and Hindu pride and Hindutva is definitely one reason. The other reason is that economic
[Guest]: possibilities and just people's capabilities to transcend the economic ladder and go up
[Guest]: has declined. And in India, if you look at the growth trajectory of the country, we used
[Guest]: to have something called the Hindu rate of growth, an extremely slow two to three percent
[Guest]: growth rate. After liberalisation in 1991, we started growing extremely fast by 1995-1996.
[Guest]: That growth rate survived till about 2012. And after 2012, we basically started stagnating
[Guest]: back to the three to four percent rate of growth. This interesting thing that has happened
[Guest]: has happened for a couple of reasons. One, technology is transforming. So India's huge
[Guest]: advantage because of which we became a powerhouse for BPO and call centres and business outsourcing
[Guest]: from the West is we spoke better English. What's happening now is South Asia, Southeast
[Guest]: Asia, the other nations, Philippines, Taiwan, Indonesia, Vietnam, all of them are learning
[Guest]: English. Even China, for that matter, who focused on manufacturing largely is entering
[Guest]: the service domain because people there are learning English. So this competitive advantage
[Guest]: is slowly declining in the country. This basically removes a huge chunk of economic mobility
[Guest]: because this is what people were entering from 1996 to 2012. When this happens, the
[Guest]: value of, say, going to an English medium school also starts declining for some people.
[Guest]: They don't see the same amount of reciprocal returns coming in. So it becomes slightly
[Guest]: easier to go into the Hindutva camp and be like, oh, we want our old traditional culture.
[Guest]: We want our pride. Because when you don't have economic growth, the only thing that
[Guest]: you have to hold on to is pride. This is a very interesting thing that I saw during my
[Guest]: time at BJP and after a lot of karakartas that you see in politics in general, most
[Guest]: people think, why is he doing gunda gardi? Why is he wearing an orange muffler? Most
[Guest]: people think that that guy believes in Hindutva. That guy believes in protecting the cow and
[Guest]: cow raksha and lynching people who are transporting cattle. This largely is not the case. The
[Guest]: interesting component that I started noticing really early on is most people are in it for
[Guest]: pride. If you look at a political karakarta, who is a political karakarta who's planting
[Guest]: your flags on the ground, who is calling people and filling them up in tempos and rickshaws
[Guest]: and taking them to political rallies? Who are these people? These people are some of
[Guest]: the lowest people in society historically, who have not been to good educational institutions,
[Guest]: who've not had good opportunities in life, who've not worked at high salaries. The people
[Guest]: who have run like some businesses here and there, done some tiny consultancy work here
[Guest]: and there, part time jobs, but they've spent most of their life at the local paan ka dukaan
[Guest]: discussing politics. Waha pe bidi peena, cigarette peena and the conversation is largely centered
[Guest]: around politics. They have not ever had respect in society. Within their families, within
[Guest]: their areas, within their entire society and their entire caste networks, they've been
[Guest]: seen as someone who doesn't do anything. Ki lokal netagiri karta hai, chota mutha gundagardhi
[Guest]: karta hai, ki this person is not someone that you should associate with, has been the image.
[Guest]: BJP has transformed this. Now that same person at the same paan ka dukaan, if he wears an
[Guest]: orange gamcha and he starts talking about Hindutva, he becomes someone who is slightly
[Guest]: more respected in society. If he talks about gauraksha, if he talks about ancient Indian
[Guest]: culture and wisdom, his respect in society grows. And because the economic aspect of
[Guest]: gaining respect is not there anymore, it is a much more difficult path. Earlier you could
[Guest]: get a good job and gain respect in society, that good job is not there anymore. So the
[Guest]: way to gain respect is becoming, you enter the fringe, you start saying more fringe things,
[Guest]: you start defending Hindutva, you start becoming a spokesperson on your WhatsApp groups and
[Guest]: that becomes something that gives you some amount of authority and respect in society.
[Guest]: And this is how most political karakartas stay engaged with the process and support
[Guest]: something that they did not say even under BJP during the Vajpayee years. When LK Advani
[Guest]: was leading the BJP after Atal Bihari Vajpayee retired, the same amount of fringe thought
[Guest]: was not there because you did not gain pride by it. Now the fringe thought keeps escalating,
[Guest]: keeps increasing and it's been especially true since 2017-18. If you look at the political
[Guest]: climate, a lot of leaders were not willing to give hate speech. The hate speeches were
[Guest]: largely WhatsApp forwards, they weren't on national television, they weren't in the television
[Guest]: studios, but they came into the television studios, they came into mainstream political
[Guest]: discourse and in the rallies and speeches of politicians after 2019-2020. And this process,
[Guest]: I believe, will keep accelerating because it's become more acceptable. And honestly,
[Guest]: it's become something that gives you respect and pride in society.
[Amit Varma]: Fascinating. And for those of my listeners who would like to sort of learn more about
[Amit Varma]: the economic trajectory you described, which is absolutely correct. I did an episode with
[Amit Varma]: Pooja Mehra on her excellent book, The Lost Decade about, you know, about how essentially
[Amit Varma]: the last 10 years, the economy has really gone down and it's not to be blamed on any
[Amit Varma]: one party. It's just a confluence of circumstances which she goes into. And I also did a recent
[Amit Varma]: episode on liberalisation, which was really popular with Ajay Shah and Shruti Rajagopalan,
[Amit Varma]: by which I don't mean to say it was popular with Ajay Shah and Shruti Rajagopalan, they
[Amit Varma]: were the guests. It was popular with everyone else. And I love the irony there that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the BJP moving away from a narrative of development to Hindutva, when actually
[Amit Varma]: it's it is a very lack of development, which is pushing people more and more towards Hindutva.
[Amit Varma]: And you mentioned the term Indic, that reminded me of a tweet that my good friend Hamsini
[Amit Varma]: Hariharan, who hosts the podcast States of Anarchy recently put out, where she said,
[Amit Varma]: quote, I'm meeting a new set of people who use Indic to substantiate every bigoted belief
[Amit Varma]: they have, stop quote. Now, one thesis, of course, is that look, there's no development,
[Amit Varma]: but so there's no getting ahead per se, but there needs to be pride. So what do you do?
[Amit Varma]: You find pride in the civilizational identity and blah, blah, blah. Another, an additional
[Amit Varma]: narrative, I won't say a counter narrative, because these things are multifactorial. But
[Amit Varma]: an additional hypothesis that I have written about, and I'll present to you now and tell
[Amit Varma]: me what you think about it, is, comes from this phrase used by the sociologist Timur
[Amit Varma]: Kuran in his 1999 book, Public Lies, Private Truths, which is preference falsification
[Amit Varma]: and preference cascades. These are the two terms he came up with. And his thesis was
[Amit Varma]: that, look, in a time where information doesn't spread too well, if people have beliefs that
[Amit Varma]: they think don't conform to widespread popular beliefs, they'll keep it to themselves. The
[Amit Varma]: example he gave was look in the Soviet Union, you know, nobody knew that everybody hated
[Amit Varma]: the state, because nobody expressed it. So everybody thought they are alone, and they
[Amit Varma]: didn't want to take a chance. But once that started getting out, once it reached a tipping
[Amit Varma]: point, you had what is a preference cascade. And suddenly, it seemed like the Soviet Union
[Amit Varma]: fell overnight, and everybody had hated it all along. Similarly, my sense is that what
[Amit Varma]: happened in India, and something that contributed to the burgeoning of Hindutva and the kind
[Amit Varma]: of polarizing discourse that we have around us, is really social media, that social media
[Amit Varma]: created preference cascades. Because let's say, you know, you hate Muslims, and you think
[Amit Varma]: women are women's places in the kitchen, but you keep it to yourself, because these are
[Amit Varma]: not things that you feel it is safe to express, because other people might disapprove. And
[Amit Varma]: then social media happens, and you realize that many, many, many people feel the way
[Amit Varma]: that you do. So you can enter different kinds of silos with them, as you've described so
[Amit Varma]: well in your book. And you are now you know, emboldened to express yourself. And every
[Amit Varma]: time you express yourself, your belief is strengthened, and you go more and more to
[Amit Varma]: the extreme. In fact, when you are in a silo with other people like yourself, the only
[Amit Varma]: way to stand out is to become more extreme than they are to, you know, enforce different
[Amit Varma]: kinds of purity tests on them. And of course, these silos and purity tests, you also find
[Amit Varma]: on the left as well as the right. But right now, we are talking about Hindutva. So what
[Amit Varma]: is your sense of this? Like, much as in a sense, you're making a living depends a little
[Amit Varma]: bit on social media and all the data gathering that this great technology enables. But at
[Amit Varma]: the same time, while I'm sure both of us would agree that technology is obviously a huge
[Amit Varma]: net positive, you have probably seen the negative aspects of it much more closely than many
[Amit Varma]: people have. So what are your thoughts?
[Guest]: Oh, so this is definitely a major factor. Social media allows groups to basically you
[Guest]: get to consolidate people on any fringe thought, because you will find a group of people which
[Guest]: will be a very small group who believes anything, no matter how fringe it is. So conspiracy
[Guest]: theory groups that came about in the US even after the elections, like people who believe
[Guest]: that the election was stolen by the current President Joe Biden, or people who believe
[Guest]: in the QAnon conspiracy theories, or even in India, people who believe that Shashank
[Guest]: Singh Rajput's death has a major nefarious plot around it. So these groups are something
[Guest]: that are created because of social media, because without it, it would be very difficult
[Guest]: for these people to come together. When we wrote the second book, we actually studied
[Guest]: Russia very deeply because we are studying information warfare and figuring out how is
[Guest]: it that people gain power by creating an information environment around you. What we realized that
[Guest]: in an autocratic regime, the ruler never wants anyone to find out how unpopular they are.
[Guest]: Because once they do find out that there are a large number of people who find them unpopular,
[Guest]: these people start consolidating into groups. But if they think that they do not like the
[Guest]: ruler personally, but everyone else around them is a loyal follower of that person, they'll
[Guest]: keep their thoughts to themselves. And no one will ever know how popular or unpopular
[Guest]: the ruler is. So this is an important aspect. This definitely applies to thoughts that would
[Guest]: be considered bigoted, thoughts that would be considered illiberal, thoughts that would
[Guest]: be considered bad by society at large. You do find enough people on social media who
[Guest]: start supporting your view, and you keep getting deeper into the silo. It's also definitely
[Guest]: true that once you are in the group, to rise within the group hierarchy, the main thing
[Guest]: that you can do is to become more and more fringe and more and more extreme. So these
[Guest]: things definitely do happen. Social media itself is a very complicated subject. When
[Guest]: it did start out, and even right now, it allows you to form groups around anything. So a lot
[Guest]: of groups that have formed are around good things. People on Twitter are learning every
[Guest]: day. People who are watching YouTube videos are learning something new every day. But
[Guest]: it also allows very bad thoughts to get exponential distribution. The algorithms are structured
[Guest]: in such a way that once you start viewing one kind of videos, start liking and supporting
[Guest]: one kind of tweets, your entire feed will get filled with that because the platform's
[Guest]: major goal is to keep you on the platform as long as possible. So it will show you any
[Guest]: content that plays to your biases, which will just keep you clicking and engaging. So this
[Guest]: does mean if you believe in something fringe, if you believe in something absolutely false,
[Guest]: your life will get saturated by the false content. And on every social media platform,
[Guest]: you will start seeing things and information and messages that basically solidify your
[Guest]: notion. So social media is doing that. What is tricky right now is that because of this
[Guest]: entire problem of misinformation and silos, governments around the world are working to
[Guest]: take power back from social media giants. And so the second book's theme is also this,
[Guest]: that power in the ancient world was largely based on how much military might you have.
[Guest]: Then it transformed to how much economic might you had. And that was the history of colonialism
[Guest]: where powers, which were economically stronger, took over much larger countries. Now power
[Guest]: within domestic politics and in the international arena is dependent upon who has the means to
[Guest]: create an information environment around people and shape their beliefs, shape their reality
[Guest]: in essence. So this power has now gone to Facebook and WhatsApp and Twitter and these
[Guest]: private companies. National governments absolutely dislike it. So almost every country that is
[Guest]: basically big enough and democratic or even authoritarian governments, they're all trying
[Guest]: to take this power back from social media giants and give it to the governmental entity
[Guest]: to shape people's reality. India is doing it in its own way by asking social media giants
[Guest]: to appoint an officer who can be arrested if posts are not taken down so that government
[Guest]: can take down any post that it does not like. Right now, that power rests with Twitter.
[Guest]: Which one is better is a very tricky debate. What I believe is that none of them are better
[Guest]: because social media giants will want you thrown into silos that keep you engaged forever,
[Guest]: no matter how bad the thought. Governments will try to censor any information that's
[Guest]: against their reality and whatever version of truth they're telling. So both of these
[Guest]: are horrible entities to regulate it. But this is the fight we have. The only one who's
[Guest]: doing something very different is actually China. They can do something very different
[Guest]: because for one, they don't have the traditional internet. They have their own internet and
[Guest]: they control all of the social media platforms on that. But their method is not to specify
[Guest]: what content can come about and can't. They are now working on this algorithm level itself.
[Guest]: They're trying to specify what content can go viral and what can't go viral. So they're
[Guest]: not censoring. But the algorithms will be designed in such a manner that content that
[Guest]: the state disapproves of will stay there, but it can't have widespread distribution.
[Guest]: It can't reach millions of people. So it's just a very interesting middle ground of handling
[Guest]: it.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know if one can call it a middle ground. I'd say it's pretty much the state controlling
[Amit Varma]: it anyway, but in a subtle way in which it isn't obvious. And you're right that this
[Amit Varma]: is something that kind of conflicts me. Like number one, of course, for any of these platforms,
[Amit Varma]: it is natural. And prima facie, one would say, if you know, in 2010, if you say, what's
[Amit Varma]: a perfect algorithm, I would say an algorithm that knows what I want to read and what I
[Amit Varma]: want to watch and what I'm likely to like, right? But then you see all these effects
[Amit Varma]: of these echo chambers and these silos coming up and the extreme polarization that happens
[Amit Varma]: and you wonder, is that a good thing? I think but completely the wrong approach to it is
[Amit Varma]: a state sort of, you know, using its iron hand to clamp it down because state power
[Amit Varma]: is something that I'm always suspicious of, you know, you know, whenever we compare something
[Amit Varma]: that's wrong with the market, and we recommend a state action, we look at the faults of the
[Amit Varma]: market, but we assume the state action will be perfect, while it is absolutely the other
[Amit Varma]: way around. State failure is ubiquitous, while market failure is rare. So in this case, while
[Amit Varma]: I accept that there's a problem with, you know, social media and these algorithms and
[Amit Varma]: what is happening to our society, because of them, which go far beyond politics, even
[Amit Varma]: which affect mental health, and there are various dimensions to it. I think it's a social
[Amit Varma]: problem which should be solved by society. If the state steps in, then we could be in
[Amit Varma]: a spot of bother. Now, I want to sort of digress here and raise a question about a phenomenon
[Amit Varma]: that you've described in your books. But I want to kind of explore the why of it, because
[Amit Varma]: I don't understand the why of it, which is that, you know, one, of course, we all know
[Amit Varma]: why narratives are so appealing, the world is incredibly complex, we explain it to ourselves
[Amit Varma]: using simple narratives, that's important and necessary. And our brain is wired to do
[Amit Varma]: that. That's cool. I get that that explains the attraction towards narratives. But a lot
[Amit Varma]: of the narratives that have gained traction over the last few years, are these crazy narratives
[Amit Varma]: like the QAnon narratives you mentioned, then the Sushant Singh Rajput narratives, like
[Amit Varma]: people are only familiar with a couple of the common narratives, I have gone into SSR
[Amit Varma]: rabbit holes, and come across some really extreme stuff, you know, like he is a creator
[Amit Varma]: of Covaxin, and that's why they killed him. And there's another popular theory where there
[Amit Varma]: is something in quantum mechanics by which an atom can be split into two. So the theory
[Amit Varma]: is that Sushant Singh Rajput once posted about this, said he wanted to learn it. So the theory,
[Amit Varma]: this particular conspiracy theory is that he split himself into two. And the SSR who
[Amit Varma]: got killed is a duplicate. And the original SSR was a guy who created Covaxin. And he
[Amit Varma]: is now in hiding, because Yogi Adityanath is looking for him. And this is something
[Amit Varma]: of that sort. I'll post a link in the show notes. It's completely bizarre. Again, disturbingly,
[Amit Varma]: you know, in your first book, you also spoke about the child kidnapping rumours that spread
[Amit Varma]: through WhatsApp. And I had an episode with Pratik Sinha of Alt News, where we spoke about
[Amit Varma]: this as well. And the nuance that he revealed was that it wasn't just one child kidnapping
[Amit Varma]: message that went out on WhatsApp groups, and then everybody forwarded it. It was constantly
[Amit Varma]: being edited with the name of the, you know, the local place, the district, the village
[Amit Varma]: being changed, you know, as it kind of kept on moving. And that's completely bizarre,
[Amit Varma]: because as you've said in your book, and as is perfectly obvious, this is not something
[Amit Varma]: any political party will do because they have nothing to benefit from this. And they won't
[Amit Varma]: even think of this. This is just bizarre. These are private individuals. But the point
[Amit Varma]: is these messages work, because people are keen to believe this narrative that kids are
[Amit Varma]: getting kidnapped and their kidneys are being taken away. People are keen to believe that
[Amit Varma]: Sushant Singh Rajput is still alive and his duplicate died and he invented Covaxin and
[Amit Varma]: shit like that. So what I'm interested in is the why I understand the human attraction
[Amit Varma]: to narratives. But why these kinds of crazy narratives, like are we just bored with the
[Guest]: world?
[Guest]: So this is actually a very interesting idea. Human desire to understand things is definitely
[Guest]: part of why people buy into stories and narratives. But why crazy thought processes work is in
[Guest]: general linked to people's desires to be part of groups. What happens is that in the modern
[Guest]: world, people aren't really part of too many communities in real life. Everyone has their
[Guest]: own life. Everyone's chasing whatever they're chasing in their own entire lives. What this
[Guest]: does is that it increases your desire to have human relationships. If it's not working out
[Guest]: in the real world, you seek it in the virtual domain. And in the virtual domain, the kind
[Guest]: of group that you fall into isn't really something that you choose. What happens is this is actually
[Guest]: very close to the formation of cults. And we've explored some religious cults getting
[Guest]: formed. And what we realized was most cults, like the message itself and what the cult
[Guest]: leader is saying doesn't matter. What matters is how distant you can be made from people
[Guest]: in the real world and how you can be made to feel like a part of a community within
[Guest]: the cult. As long as that is there, you will support any belief system no matter how absurd
[Guest]: it keeps becoming, because then you feel like you belong to a community. You belong to a
[Guest]: certain group of people. Those people will stand with you. And anyone who does not support
[Guest]: it is someone who is against you and against the group and is trying to harm you. This
[Guest]: entire sentiment is what major conspiracy theories and cults are centered around.
[Guest]: This group thing getting built is very, it's a very weird phenomenon because what we realized
[Guest]: in the data itself, we analyzed data about cyber scammers and how cyber scammers got
[Guest]: people to give them OTPs because we were trying to explore what kind of a person falls for
[Guest]: a scam like this. We found absolutely no correlation. It was not linked to your education level.
[Guest]: It was not linked to your language ability. It was not linked to your socioeconomic status.
[Guest]: So someone very poor who's not been to school is exactly as likely to fall for a scam statistically
[Guest]: as someone who is very educated and very rich. This told us something very interesting that
[Guest]: this is something within the human mind and within the human being that leads you to fall
[Guest]: for these stories, these narratives, and the story and narrative will be different for
[Guest]: each individual. Not the same thing is going to work for every person. Like if you bring
[Guest]: a concept from the US, like if you look at the US, there are people who are so committed
[Guest]: to the right to life that they want to outlaw abortion. That particular messaging does not
[Guest]: exist in India. It will probably be a very hard sell to try and build it up and it would
[Guest]: take a couple of years. But if you have something like the caste system that is so prevalent
[Guest]: in India and there is one caste group who thinks another caste group is against us,
[Guest]: you can't take that out of India and try to implant that messaging within a different
[Guest]: society. So different messaging works. Who falls for Sushant Singh Rajput versus QAnon
[Guest]: versus who falls for child kidnapping rumours is a very interesting area of study that we
[Guest]: are still studying and still working on, especially related to geopolitics. So we are doing it
[Guest]: at a nation state level, not at an individual level per se, but very interesting area and
[Guest]: I don't think anyone knows the answer. Beyond people's desire to be a part of a community
[Guest]: is much stronger than people's desire to look at what's real and what's not real.
[Amit Varma]: I totally buy that. The desire to be part of a community is both ever-present and poignant
[Amit Varma]: in a sense. It kind of tells you about how even in these modern times with 7 billion
[Amit Varma]: people and all of that, one can, you know, everybody's essentially in a minority of one
[Amit Varma]: and looking for ways to kind of get past that. But as you pointed out, in some of those cases
[Amit Varma]: that doesn't apply like the OTP scams or the KYC scams or whatever, where they're believing
[Amit Varma]: a narrative, but obviously there's no community involved. You know, the kind of scam I expected
[Amit Varma]: you would write about, but you chose these local Indian scams, but the Nigerian prince
[Amit Varma]: kind of scam, right? A Nigerian prince wants to give you his money and blah, blah, blah,
[Amit Varma]: and all of that, which is again, a crazy story that you believe and there's no community
[Amit Varma]: at the end of it. So clearly we are wired to believe this kind of shit or maybe we are
[Amit Varma]: just bored. So, you know, it's like, who knows, maybe we are addicted to narratives and you
[Guest]: want every hit to be greater than the last. So there actually is a community angle there
[Guest]: because most of these scammers are trying to recruit people to be their friends. Like
[Guest]: there are two ways to do it. One is to scare people into it, tell them that accounts are
[Guest]: going to get blocked, something very bad is going to happen. And they are their friend
[Guest]: trying to save them from such a bleak and dark place through which it will be very difficult
[Guest]: for them to navigate. The other one is them telling that how you would be rewarded if
[Guest]: you tell them the OTP because you won the special prize, you won the special thing.
[Guest]: If you look at the Nigerian print scams, those scams take months. It's not one email and
[Guest]: send someone sending you money. It's literally someone cultivating a relationship with you
[Guest]: over the course of three to six months. Or even we've actually seen instances where people
[Guest]: have done this for two years and then got someone to give them money. So it's a long
[Guest]: term investment in forming a relationship. The other part that I wanted to mention is
[Guest]: with any conspiracy theory, it never starts at the fringe. With something like Sushant
[Guest]: Singh Rajput, it never starts at Sushant Singh Rajput splitting into two or him inventing
[Guest]: a COVID vaccine. It always starts with very reasonable things. It always starts with something
[Guest]: which people are likely to believe because there is also tangential evidence linking
[Guest]: to it. That evidence is taken out of context, that evidence is placed in a completely different
[Guest]: perspective. But it exists. And that's how reasonable people come into it. After that
[Guest]: is when it starts spiraling into something completely insane.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's a really great point. Because I think the first conspiracy theory was, oh,
[Amit Varma]: look, his, you know, his agent Disha Salian died a week or a couple of weeks before that.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a crooked politician involved. And all of us know politicians are crooked.
[Amit Varma]: So all those are plausible bits of information which are verifiable, because it is a fact
[Amit Varma]: that she did die a couple of weeks before that. But then you build them together and
[Amit Varma]: make this kind of crazy story out of it. Having digressed so much, let's go back to your personal
[Amit Varma]: history. And let me now kind of, so I've hit the back button on the browser, and now I'm
[Amit Varma]: double clicking on another of the links. So an interesting thing that you kind of mentioned
[Amit Varma]: again, while talking about the Bachelor of Economics that you did there, is that just
[Amit Varma]: because everyone else was kind of doing it, you said, let me also do computer science.
[Amit Varma]: And by the way, there was this recent video which went viral on Twitter, which you must
[Amit Varma]: have seen, where people were mocking this kid. This is poor kid who got into one of
[Amit Varma]: these IITs. And he had studied very hard for it. He didn't go to parties, just, you know,
[Amit Varma]: that kind of work ethic. And he said, I want to do computer science. And the person asked
[Amit Varma]: him why. And he said, because everyone else is doing it. And the snobs on Twitter were
[Amit Varma]: mocking him for it. Because why is he, you know, doing it if he doesn't want to do it?
[Amit Varma]: I thought his reason was perfectly good. And it turns out that he actually did finish his
[Amit Varma]: course and he's now got a plus job in Korea and all of that. And he's really good at computer
[Amit Varma]: science as well. So more power to him. And so while reading your book, it struck me that
[Amit Varma]: hey, Shivam also in that category. But that turned out to be really fortuitous for you,
[Amit Varma]: because that was practically the base of whatever you went on to do. So tell me about your sort
[Amit Varma]: of entry into data analytics and computer science. And did it in some fundamental way,
[Amit Varma]: change the way that you looked at the world around you? Like I didn't study data analytics,
[Amit Varma]: but I was a professional poker player for a few years. And you know, got deep into math
[Amit Varma]: and probabilities and game theory and all of that. And I just found that probabilistic
[Amit Varma]: theory just completely changed the way I look at every single thing around me. So was this
[Amit Varma]: something, you know, analytics, data science played that kind of role for you as well?
[Guest]: Oh, definitely. So I yes, I did the computer science courses because a lot of my Indian
[Guest]: friends were doing computer science. So just because I wanted to be in the group while
[Guest]: they talked computer science stuff. And I wanted to understand like what they were talking
[Guest]: about. I did a lot of computer science courses, definitely one of the most valuable courses
[Guest]: I've done, at least in my worldview at this point of time. At least understanding how
[Guest]: code works helps you in pretty much every domain. Because even if you don't code yourself,
[Guest]: at some point of time, you will need to explain to another coder, because everything is moving
[Guest]: online in one way or the other. Every space that we see around us, there is some amount
[Guest]: of automation coming in, there is some amount of technology coming in to transform those
[Guest]: spaces. So that way, I think it's extremely valuable. It does transform your way of thinking
[Guest]: in econometrics and statistics. It does tell you how biased your thinking is. In a way,
[Guest]: what happens is on one side, while studying econometrics, you're being told how human
[Guest]: biases play in. Because a lot of the questions that we answered in class, the guess that
[Guest]: you would have, the gut instinct that you would have is far off from what the statistics
[Guest]: tells you. And then on the other hand, while learning computer science, you realize that
[Guest]: the computer is a very efficient thing, but it's also a very dumb thing. People think
[Guest]: computers are smart, but code needs to be written in a way where every step is extremely
[Guest]: clear. There is no space for ambiguity. It's not like a human being that you tell them,
[Guest]: okay, go to the market, and then get me this. You have to specify every step, you have to
[Guest]: specify every action that the computer needs to take for it to work. It's changing now
[Guest]: with machine learning and AI coming in where computers can also teach some things to themselves.
[Guest]: But traditional computer science, it does tell you that the thought process must be
[Guest]: so systematic, where you need to specify every step of the way. Once I started doing this
[Guest]: in life, and after the entire political journey, after writing two books, I realized something
[Guest]: special about the stories that people tell themselves. What happens is that you try 10
[Guest]: different things. Political parties try 10 different things. And three of those work
[Guest]: wonderfully well. And then someone comes to the TV studios. I have also been to the TV
[Guest]: studios and done this. Then you tell a story that, oh, this happened. And then we saw this
[Guest]: data and then we saw this. That's why we built this campaign. And then we did this campaign
[Guest]: next. And then we did this. And this is how we got the votes. And it's an excellent story.
[Guest]: Everyone's like, oh my God, that is so smart. That is genius. Except in life, everyone is
[Guest]: trying 10 separate things at the same time. Two or three of them work, seven or eight
[Guest]: of them don't. You disregard the seven or eight entirely and you form a story around
[Guest]: those two or three. And that's how my life has been too. Now I'm clear what I'm doing.
[Guest]: So I have a story around how I was always interested in politics. Might not have been
[Guest]: the case if I was not so successful within my journey in politics and like political
[Guest]: consultancy in general, might have been an entirely different story. So computer science
[Guest]: does get you to think this way in steps and stages.
[Amit Varma]: That's wonderful. So what we'll do now is that we have pretty much done with your pre-political
[Amit Varma]: years. We might come back to it later. So let's take a quick commercial break. And when
[Amit Varma]: we come back, we'll take you to Varanasi.
[Amit Varma]: Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer. In fact, chances are that many of you first
[Amit Varma]: heard of me because of my blog India Uncut, which was active between 2003 and 2009 and
[Amit Varma]: became somewhat popular at the time. I love the freedom the form gave me and I feel I
[Amit Varma]: was shaped by it in many ways. I exercise my writing muscle every day and was forced
[Amit Varma]: to think about many different things because I wrote about many different things. Well,
[Amit Varma]: that phase in my life ended for various reasons. And now it is time to revive it. Only now
[Amit Varma]: I'm doing it through a newsletter. I have started the India Uncut newsletter at IndiaUncut.substack.com
[Amit Varma]: where I will write regularly about whatever catches my fancy. I'll write about some of
[Amit Varma]: the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else. So please do head on over to IndiaUncut.substack.com
[Amit Varma]: and subscribe. It is free. Once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land
[Amit Varma]: up in your email inbox. You don't need to go anywhere. So subscribe now for free. The
[Amit Varma]: India Uncut newsletter at IndiaUncut.substack.com. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to The Seen and The Unseen. I'm chatting with Shivam Shankar Singh about the
[Amit Varma]: two wonderful books he's written, How to Win an Indian Election and The Art of Conjuring
[Amit Varma]: Alternate Realities. And of course, they're related. But you know, before we even sort
[Amit Varma]: of get to those books, and before your Lamb Fellowship even, you've described in your
[Amit Varma]: first book about how you landed up in Varanasi in 2013, because you were kind of disgusted
[Amit Varma]: at what was happening to governance in India, you realized it was time for a change, you
[Amit Varma]: bought into some of Modi's campaign rhetoric about, you know, development and so on. And
[Amit Varma]: you came out here and you went and volunteered in Varanasi. Tell me a little bit about that
[Amit Varma]: experience. Because like number one, did you ever think that you also want to be in politics
[Amit Varma]: per se? And were you exploring that when you went along? What was your immediate motivation
[Amit Varma]: per se? Or did you just find it an interesting field at an intellectual level? And you were
[Amit Varma]: like, hey, I want to understand this? Or was it this vague notion that, you know, I want
[Amit Varma]: to help take my country forward and let me dive into this and see if there is something
[Amit Varma]: here. And of course, in hindsight, like you mentioned before the break, this clarity,
[Amit Varma]: you can you can construct an exact story and how you got here from there, as it were the
[Amit Varma]: code of our lives is often written in hindsight after it's after the program has already played
[Amit Varma]: out as it were. But at that time, you know, what were your motivations? What were you
[Amit Varma]: looking for? What were you thinking? Take me through some of that.
[Guest]: So this was 2014, right before the general elections. Primary motivation was that I had
[Guest]: never actually seen an election in real life. And I was interested in politics. I already
[Guest]: knew at that time that I would be joining the Lamb Fellowship and working in the Indian
[Guest]: Parliament. I really wanted to see an election. And what I realized was that you can actually
[Guest]: just go and see an election. India is an amazing country. That way you reach out to a politician.
[Guest]: Most of them are extremely welcoming. You tell them I want to see your election campaign.
[Guest]: They will invite you to their constituency. They will get you to sit in some random karakartas
[Guest]: car and they will be like go to this rally here and they will be very excited to do it.
[Guest]: So that was my level of engagement in Varanasi. I was largely an observer. I wasn't helping
[Guest]: out with the campaign in any way. Also wasn't in a position to help the prime minister of
[Guest]: the country in his election campaign in his constituency. But it was an extremely interesting
[Guest]: journey. Went to a lot of different places, talked to a lot of different people. The first
[Guest]: thing that I started noticing was that the Modi wave in 2014 was so strong that you had
[Guest]: random kids shouting BJP slogans, wearing BJP hats. So I even have pictures posted to
[Guest]: Facebook where random kids are hanging on to me wearing BJP hats. And that entire situation
[Guest]: that was there at that point of time, the entire euphoria that was there in the entire
[Guest]: population made me really excited about elections in general.
[Guest]: So some of the most exciting days in my life have been like one, one and a half months
[Guest]: before elections. And it doesn't even matter who I'm supporting. It's just the atmosphere
[Guest]: there. Indian elections for most people in urban India are these things where like people
[Guest]: are debating on TV, angry at each other, shouting at each other. In most of India outside the
[Guest]: urban metros, elections are festivals. It's huge rallies happening. It's crowds coming
[Guest]: to cities from different villages with politicians arranging free transport for them. It's an
[Guest]: entire holiday outing. They come to the main metro city to listen to the speech, but then
[Guest]: after the speech, they shop there, they go around there. The buses take like the next
[Guest]: five or six hours just standing there while people explore the towns and the cities of
[Guest]: this country. A lot of times political parties also pay people to come to rallies, which
[Guest]: is obviously a horrible thing for democracy, but is also a form of economic redistribution.
[Guest]: Political parties and politicians made money. When the election is happening, that money
[Guest]: is going to come out and that is going to go to citizens, that is going to go to tent
[Guest]: dwellers, that is going to go to rickshaw drivers, that is going to go to bus drivers.
[Guest]: This entire process, extremely illegal, extremely horrible for democracy. But when you see it
[Guest]: on the ground, it feels like a really cheerful thing. It seems like a festival with gifts
[Guest]: being distributed by the politicians to the voters. So this experience of one election
[Guest]: in Varanasi got me excited about elections for one, gave me an understanding of what
[Guest]: democracy and elections mean to people in this country, what the value is. We value
[Guest]: elections a lot less than this country's rural population and this country's poor population
[Guest]: because the results of elections don't affect our lives in the same way.
[Guest]: If say someone else wins today, my life would largely remain the same. I don't depend on
[Guest]: government benefits. I have not been to a government school. My kids are very unlikely
[Guest]: to go to a government school. The roads that we go to end up paying tolls on all of them.
[Guest]: We don't avail of any of the different government schemes. We are not getting housing under
[Guest]: Indira Awas. We are not working for NREGA. We are not taking ration from the PDS system.
[Guest]: We are extremely distant from the government. But this country's poor population and this
[Guest]: country's rural population, almost every person is getting the benefit of some or the
[Guest]: other government scheme. They're getting rations, they're getting houses, they're getting toilets
[Guest]: built, getting gas cylinders. The impact of a government change on them, and then there
[Guest]: is another aspect to it that is slightly more negative. The parties are based around religion
[Guest]: and the parties are based around caste. So in urban India, these things matter, but they
[Guest]: still matter less. In rural areas, one party comes to power that is based around a certain
[Guest]: caste group, that caste group feels emboldened and empowered enough to suppress other caste
[Guest]: groups within the rural area. They feel emboldened enough to do illegal things, like with BJP
[Guest]: in power. The consequence on a rural Muslim household on a daily basis is going to be
[Guest]: much worse than say housing discrimination in Mumbai, which exists, which is a major
[Guest]: problem, but it is not a daily problem. In the other parts of India, it's a daily problem.
[Guest]: So who comes to power, who wins an election will influence the course of your life much
[Guest]: more than it would for you or me. And this is something that you can only realize once
[Guest]: you go to an election campaign and talk to the people there. Why are they there? What
[Guest]: are they doing there? Then going to Banaras, Varanasi also had another sense. I understood
[Guest]: the election economy slightly better. I went to Kashi Vishwanath, I went to a couple of
[Guest]: other temples, I went to the Hanuman Mandir. Kashi Vishwanath is also a very big political
[Guest]: entity in Varanasi. So I talked to the Pandit there for a really long time. And I'd also
[Guest]: like gone with some political people. So they assumed I was important enough to like engage
[Guest]: and talk to. So we talked for a really long time. And he told me about like Arvind Kejriwal
[Guest]: coming to Varanasi and his discussions with Arvind Kejriwal. He told me about his discussions
[Guest]: with other people and how he was supporting Narendra Modi and what his motivation was.
[Guest]: And then you start to realize how important these different people are in elections. It
[Guest]: turned out to be incredibly helpful while I was working on election campaigns in the
[Guest]: Northeast, because we are dismissive of people who try to say that I have 500 votes, I have
[Guest]: 1000 votes, I have 400 votes. But once you meet a couple of them, you start to learn
[Guest]: how to analyze if they actually have these votes before you even engage with them. So
[Guest]: while I was in the Northeast, there are a lot of tribal chiefs, there are a lot of village
[Guest]: heads, village tribesmen, elders in the village who have the capacity to shift votes in their
[Guest]: local village, in their local area, because the community respects them. So they have
[Guest]: demands from you. Some of them are political demands. Some of them are demands for the
[Guest]: local area. Some of them are like social demands. Some of them are like personal demands for
[Guest]: their own personal benefits. All of that happens together. But you realize that, okay, these
[Guest]: people exist in the country who are respected enough or feared enough in the community to
[Guest]: transfer votes. And this value of these people in democracy, I saw in Banaras for the first
[Guest]: time.
[Amit Varma]: So a lot of fascinating things are and you know, one of the insights I noted down while
[Amit Varma]: reading your book was when you talk about whatever other data or whatever other metrics
[Amit Varma]: you look at, one metric that you feel is reliable for identifying if there is a wave or not
[Amit Varma]: is how excited the children are. And you said that's when you know, you were in Varanasi
[Amit Varma]: and you saw all these kids who are enthusiastic about Modi that you realize that there was
[Amit Varma]: something there that was pretty big, much as you know, people say that if an earthquake
[Amit Varma]: is coming, your dog will know. But you know, my question there is that, you know, if your
[Amit Varma]: dog is acting weirdly, how do you know whether it's hungry or there's an earthquake coming?
[Amit Varma]: You can't assume there's an earthquake coming every time. But I have a dog, so I don't know
[Amit Varma]: that very well. So I have two or three questions that arise out of what you just said. And
[Amit Varma]: one of the things that really intrigues me and which you would know intimately, but I
[Amit Varma]: don't and most of my listeners certainly don't. So we are hoping for some enlightenment there
[Amit Varma]: is what is the ecosystem of party workers like across parties? Like, it's a question
[Amit Varma]: that often comes to me that what motivates a party worker, a lot of party workers, for
[Amit Varma]: example, don't even really get paid, you know, most of them can't really aspire to realistic
[Amit Varma]: power. Of course, they might have little driblets of power by virtue of being somewhere in the
[Amit Varma]: party hierarchy. And that can be intoxicating on its own. And once you have it, you don't
[Amit Varma]: want to let it go, I get that. But by and large, most party workers, you know, what
[Amit Varma]: are they motivated by what are their incentives, you know, at the level of the BJP, to some
[Amit Varma]: extent, I know a lot of the foot soldiers were of course provided by the RSS and all
[Amit Varma]: that. And there's a deeper connection to community and to ideology that goes on there. And I
[Amit Varma]: get that. But I look at all the other parties and all of that. What's the scene out there?
[Amit Varma]: Like in your case, you're a professional, you're coming with data analytics, part of
[Amit Varma]: what is driving you is also a hunger to learn. Like you talk about how you know, during the
[Amit Varma]: Amarinder Singh campaign in Punjab, which of course, we'll come to a little later, because
[Amit Varma]: I have questions on that as well. But during that campaign, you landed up and you realized
[Amit Varma]: that there was no data analytics, it was just boring data collection, and you didn't want
[Amit Varma]: to do that. So you focused on another domain. So you're driven at that point by curiosity
[Amit Varma]: and the hunger to learn. But what about what about actual party workers? What about karyakartas?
[Amit Varma]: How is this ecosystem kind of held together? Give me a sense of that.
[Guest]: So one sad reality is that most party karyakartas are people with very low opportunity costs.
[Guest]: This is true, largely because someone who has a good job has a stable family and has
[Guest]: to go to office nine to five, and gets a good salary is very unlikely to resign from that
[Guest]: job and become a party karyakarta because there is no real future to it. So it's largely
[Guest]: people who were just surviving. And they have a couple of reasons to get into the party
[Guest]: structure and get into a party hierarchy. One is obviously a sense of belonging and
[Guest]: purpose, which is something that everyone is looking for in life. A lot of people find
[Guest]: it in their careers, a lot of people find it in providing for their family, a lot of
[Guest]: people find it in politics when they're contributing to a party coming to power. So that is the
[Guest]: first part. This also includes the RSS karyakartas who support the BJP. They're there for the
[Guest]: purposes of supporting an identity, supporting a belief system, because it gives them a sense
[Guest]: of purpose. There is nothing real and tangible that they're gaining out of it, other than
[Guest]: a friend circle, a community and a purpose and something to do in life. The second kind
[Guest]: of karyakarta that's there, which is a much bigger proportion, actually, is people who
[Guest]: are there because they see it as something that can provide some amount of social mobility.
[Guest]: And the social mobility includes economic mobility, because sometimes they will reach
[Guest]: out to someone higher up in the party hierarchy and be able to deliver on a couple of projects.
[Guest]: They might be able to get someone like a college admission, a school admission, they might
[Guest]: be able to get someone a really tiny tender for a road repair work, things like that.
[Guest]: They might be able to go to the local police station, call their superior in the party
[Guest]: hierarchy or the MP or the MLA, and the MP and MLA would recognize that this is my karyakarta.
[Guest]: So they will talk to the police station for you and help you with a couple of cases here
[Guest]: and there. So that is a very big set of people. There is a local economy built around it.
[Guest]: So if you see a village, and if you see someone who's having a problem, say someone goes to
[Guest]: get pension, but the official there, the government official refuses to listen, does not give
[Guest]: them the form even, and throws them out. Who do they go to? Do they directly go to, say,
[Guest]: the nation's capital and talk to the prime minister? They can't, they can't go to the
[Guest]: chief minister, they can't even reach the MLA or the MP, because these are busy people
[Guest]: who live very far away from them. They live in the district capital. What they do is that
[Guest]: they know which party is in power, they know who is the local karyakarta for this party
[Guest]: within my village, within my area, they reach out to that guy. And then they tell them ki
[Guest]: bhai, maine vote diya hai, yeh mera kaam atka hua hai, tum karwa. Then this karyakarta goes
[Guest]: with them to the official, talks on their behalf. He is somewhere in the party hierarchy
[Guest]: so he is also more confident. He tells them with confidence that okay, I am this, please
[Guest]: do this work. Sometimes money exchanges hands at this level, sometimes it doesn't. But at
[Guest]: the end of it, local work gets delivered. So these people are someone in society, and
[Guest]: some people are running the households off of it, some aren't, but it provides value
[Guest]: to them directly. Then there is a third kind of karyakarta, the third one is someone who
[Guest]: is actually an aspirant. They believe that at some point in the future, they could contest
[Guest]: say a ward councillor election, the local panchayat election. They could contest, even
[Guest]: if they don't contest, they could become part of the village monitoring committee.
[Guest]: They could become part of different committees like there are railway committees, there are
[Guest]: committees on women and child development, there are committees for everything in India.
[Guest]: And a lot of these people who are nominated to these committees are actually political
[Guest]: workers. And that's how it's been across the history of India. And that's been the means
[Guest]: of rewarding karyakartas who are slightly above the bilkul ground ka karyakarta. So
[Guest]: distantly these three types.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's a fascinating ecosystem. And when you sort of said at the start that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: party workers are those with the lowest opportunity cost, the first thought that came to my mind
[Amit Varma]: is, oh, then the all the losers become party karyakartas. But by which of course, you know,
[Amit Varma]: it is true that many people don't have opportunity cost for anything simply because they're not
[Amit Varma]: born into privilege. They haven't been able to get an education, they're poor. But even
[Amit Varma]: within that strata, those who are likely to have the least opportunity cost are the sort
[Amit Varma]: of the losers in that bunch.
[Guest]: So it is not a completely terrible situation once, it's also not someone dying of hunger,
[Guest]: you have to realize that it is someone who has enough land, say, in the village to support
[Guest]: his family, or who has a parent who has, say, a permanent government job, who is a school
[Amit Varma]: teacher who is a postmaster, and this guy is surviving off of the family.
[Amit Varma]: So lack of opportunity cost in that sense, also that he can feed himself, and he's got
[Amit Varma]: that kind of security and all of that. And, you know, for my listeners, another concept
[Amit Varma]: I'll kind of talk about here is that coined by an economist called Mankar Olson called
[Amit Varma]: stationary bandits and roving bandits. And where Olson comes at is that imagine that
[Amit Varma]: there's just a village in the middle of nowhere, and you have bandits coming and going. Now
[Amit Varma]: a group of roving bandits are, you know, it'll come, and it'll just take everything, it doesn't
[Amit Varma]: give a shit about what you're left with, it'll come take everything, go away, and it's done.
[Amit Varma]: But then a group of bandits will come, which will decide that they want to stay there.
[Amit Varma]: And they're what is called the stationary bandits. And for them, it doesn't make sense
[Amit Varma]: to rob the people of everything, because hey, they're going to stay there and they need
[Amit Varma]: the people on their side, and they need to, you know, not kill the golden goose, as it
[Amit Varma]: were. So they start sort of governing these people, as it were, whom they've kind of whose
[Amit Varma]: lives they've taken over, and, you know, helping them in small ways, but continuing to kind
[Amit Varma]: of rob them. And the state is basically a stationary bandit. And, you know, I remember
[Amit Varma]: I'd once written an essay in the context of Naxalism, in those areas where Naxalism does
[Amit Varma]: take place, where my point was that the state hasn't taken that role of stationary bandit,
[Amit Varma]: the rule of law is absent. So sometimes the Naxals will come, and they'll be roving bandits,
[Amit Varma]: sometimes, you know, the state will do exactly that. And sometimes the Naxals will actually
[Amit Varma]: try to build an ecosystem so that they can be stationary bandits for a while. And it
[Amit Varma]: strikes me that what you describe as ki mera yeh kaam nahi hua, you go to the party karyakarta,
[Amit Varma]: it's almost as if with the state being really weak and rickety and absent in some ways,
[Amit Varma]: you have, you know, the party machinery or whichever party is in power, taking over some
[Amit Varma]: of those roles and saying, fine, you know, you voted for us. So we'll look after you
[Amit Varma]: in that very bandit-y quid pro quo. Now, I did an episode with Milan Vashnavan, his excellent
[Amit Varma]: book on crime in Indian politics, which you also cite. And one of the points Milan made
[Amit Varma]: was that look, elections take a lot of money. And you've detailed that, in fact, in your
[Amit Varma]: book with a lot of fantastic figures, elections need a lot of money. So initially, in independent
[Amit Varma]: India, there was that thing that okay, who has money, the local ganglord has money, you
[Amit Varma]: take money from him, you do your quid pro quo. And later on, at a later point in time,
[Amit Varma]: the ganglord himself kind of gets into politics, because he's like, I have the money, you know,
[Amit Varma]: why should I give it to someone else, I'll become the MP, which is what you find throughout
[Amit Varma]: central India. And there, I guess, incentives of the party workers may be a little different,
[Amit Varma]: because the party workers are actually part of the gang. Like, you know, the way our democracy
[Amit Varma]: is, I often talk about our political parties as competing mafias, which, you know, rival
[Amit Varma]: mafias, which compete every five years to take a monopoly on power that the state kind
[Amit Varma]: of gives you. But anyway, all of that is kind of a digression. Tell me about sort of the
[Amit Varma]: role that money plays in all of this. Because one of the things that we all know is that
[Amit Varma]: it takes an enormous amount of money to just contest an election, leave alone win it. And
[Amit Varma]: power and money, of course, have a circular relationship. The point is, if you invest,
[Amit Varma]: if one, you need money from somewhere to invest, and when you invest, you need a return on
[Amit Varma]: investment. So you're giving contracts to people, road banao, ye banao, wo banao, all
[Amit Varma]: kinds of corruption comes in, which is taken as power for the cause, which people even
[Amit Varma]: understand and expect of all the parties. And there is this sort of circular relationship,
[Amit Varma]: therefore, going on. At a time when I was professionally writing limericks for the Times
[Amit Varma]: of India, I'd come up with one called politics. So I'll just read that out. A Neta who loves
[Amit Varma]: currency notes, told me what his line of work denotes. It is kind of funny, we steal people's
[Amit Varma]: money and use some of it to buy their votes, stop quote, which kind of is, you know, an
[Amit Varma]: ironic truth about the predatory state, which most of us have just completely normalized.
[Amit Varma]: All this time where you were in these different machineries in Punjab, in the Northeast, and
[Amit Varma]: all of that, you know, working with the party machinery, how did that kind of function?
[Amit Varma]: Like number one, I assume that as a political consultant, you were paid. And regardless
[Amit Varma]: of your individual case, were there a lot of paid workers as well, professionals who
[Amit Varma]: were actually getting money for what they were doing? Or were they more like true believers
[Amit Varma]: or who just wanted to be part of the process? And how does that funneling of money happen?
[Amit Varma]: You've also spoken about how, despite demonetization, you know, parties still figured it out, they
[Amit Varma]: had money to spend and all of that. So tell me a little bit about the financial ecosystem,
[Amit Varma]: which is, you know, sort of fueling all of this. Is that something that you were acquainted
[Amit Varma]: with and had special insights on? Or, you know, were you just an executive and it wasn't
[Amit Varma]: your job to think about where the money is coming from?
[Guest]: So as a consultant, almost everybody is getting paid. But the interesting part is that during
[Guest]: elections, every worker is getting paid. They're not getting paid year round, most of the times
[Guest]: they're just working for the party. But when it comes time for elections, literally everyone
[Guest]: who has anything to do with politics is getting paid at some level or the other. Some people
[Guest]: are getting paid because the party thinks they can transfer votes. Some people are getting
[Guest]: paid in the name of bringing people to rallies. So they're getting paid for arranging the
[Guest]: buses, arranging the food, but it's always like a surplus amount attached to it that
[Guest]: they pocket, which is a very well understood phenomenon. If you look at polling agents,
[Guest]: so every party needs people at the booth during polling day who basically write the parchi,
[Guest]: hand it over to the people, then they go inside and vote. These agents basically get paid
[Guest]: from 1000 to 2000 in North India. If you look at South India and the Northeast, then it
[Guest]: starts at 5000, below that, no one's really willing to engage with you. So every booth
[Guest]: that you look at and even if you look at an assembly constituency, it's 200 to 250 booths
[Guest]: and it's five times this in a parliamentary constituency. So 2000 into this is just your
[Guest]: expenditure on election day to have one person at each of the booths. So it's obviously a
[Guest]: very expensive exercise. Where it is becoming more expensive is that it's very difficult
[Guest]: to get your name out to the voting public. For people to even know that you exist. You
[Guest]: now need to spend on social media, you need to spend on Facebook, you need to create these
[Guest]: groups which can create graphics for you create videos for you. You need people around you
[Guest]: are clicking your pictures and posting it continuously. Then you need paid advertising
[Guest]: in newspapers, you need these radio jingles made for you. You need video vans going around
[Guest]: in constituencies that play the party's movie that play your songs all over the place. So
[Guest]: the costs are increasing for two major reasons. One, the means of information dissemination
[Guest]: have increased. Like earlier India decided that okay, we will give you free airtime on
[Guest]: the national DD network. And we will give you free airtime on all India radio. All candidates
[Guest]: still get that free airtime. There is a lottery on when you will get to speak how long you'll
[Guest]: get to speak and stuff. It's a very interesting process, but no candidate cares. So from the
[Guest]: party, I was deputed to go collect that slip, because no one wanted to do it. The reality
[Guest]: is now there are so many private channels, there are so many newspapers, there are so
[Guest]: many radio stations, that the government providing you free airtime on the national one doesn't
[Guest]: mean anything. Social media becoming this new thing that is a major drain on resources.
[Guest]: Somehow people think that social media is cheap. It is not. An entity like Facebook
[Guest]: is a very like money hungry entity in the sense that organic reach has essentially become
[Guest]: zero. If you want your message and posts seen, you need to pay them. Other than this, when
[Guest]: you are organizing an election campaign, you need to get people to the booth. In my experience,
[Guest]: you can change the election day result by four to 6% just based on booth management
[Guest]: on like one day before election and the election day. So in two days, if you are so much better
[Guest]: than the other side, you can shift the results by four to 6%. So something like this also
[Guest]: requires money because you need people to go out, you need people to fill other people
[Guest]: in autos and rickshaws and get them to the polling station. It's called a get out the
[Guest]: vote campaign like it is in the US, except it works very differently in India. So these
[Guest]: things matter. Money matters. How the money comes in is undergoing a massive transformation
[Guest]: in this country. If you look at what happened after independence, you're right that industrialists
[Guest]: and local mafias funded the politicians. Then they decided to become politicians themselves
[Guest]: in a lot of areas. A lot of contractors and builders who used to fund the local politicians
[Guest]: also decided to become politicians themselves because all their work and contracts is anyways
[Guest]: dependent on paying someone. So they realized why not cut out the middlemen and do this
[Guest]: myself. So that has happened. What is transforming under the current government though is that
[Guest]: resources are getting centralized. Most political parties in India depended on a mix of candidates.
[Guest]: Some candidates used to be people who can fund elections for themselves and other people.
[Guest]: So those constituencies, the ticket used to be sold. And then that money used to cross
[Guest]: subsidize candidates who were good, who could will, but did not have the money to contest.
[Guest]: This was the regular system that was at play. Local candidates were expected to raise their
[Guest]: own local resources from their friends, family, businesses, any interest that they could find.
[Guest]: Now it's becoming more and more centralized. BJP as a political party doesn't really depend
[Guest]: on the candidates. To a large extent, they understand that the voter is voting for Narendra
[Guest]: Modi. The campaign is being done around the prime minister. The campaign is being done
[Guest]: by BJP. The local candidate doesn't have much to do with it at all. Local candidate can
[Guest]: raise and spend whatever they want or not want. The party will spend the huge amounts.
[Guest]: The party will do all of the advertising around a central image, which is right now the prime
[Guest]: minister. And then build an entire election campaign where the voter knows that they have
[Guest]: to press the camel because they want to vote for PM Narendra Modi. And this is true everywhere
[Guest]: from say a municipal election to the state level elections to obviously the national
[Guest]: election. So the MPs and MLAs and their spending is a very like a thing that doesn't matter
[Guest]: to BJP as much. But what does this mean? This means that the central collection of resources
[Guest]: has to be much stronger. And what this also means is that you cannot take money from small
[Guest]: builders and contractors and expect it to reach the party level. That would never work.
[Guest]: So now the politics of this nation is headed towards where the US politics is, where political
[Guest]: parties become very dependent on very few business interests. There are going to be
[Guest]: 10, 20, 30 business people who are accounting for the bulk of the money that a political
[Guest]: party raises. So you become beholden to those 20 people. Whereas in the previous model,
[Guest]: yes, small contracts, small local thekas used to go to these people who funded elections.
[Guest]: But at the larger national level, there were no like 10 businessmen who were like absolutely
[Guest]: dominant and absolutely controlling everything. This transformation could seem like a positive
[Guest]: to some who don't have to spend as much in the local elections, who don't have to give
[Guest]: as much money to the politicians. But it is also detrimental to the country in a way because
[Guest]: now what the people expect is not contracts. What they expect is entire changes in law
[Guest]: that eliminate all competition. We expect entire changes in policy which give them access
[Guest]: to say an area that was preserved, saved from mining because of environmental considerations,
[Guest]: because of the local tribes there. So these kinds of interests also want major things.
[Guest]: There have been a couple of very interesting instances that we've heard of in the rumor
[Guest]: mill, where people have gotten import duties changed on products so that they could just
[Guest]: like benefit from the difference on it. If you increase the import duty of an imported
[Guest]: product, say the glass that goes on top of solar panels, very few entities, if you look
[Guest]: it up, you'll know which entity it is, a very specific entity that makes it in India. They
[Guest]: are so tiny that they can't fulfill domestic demand, but they still lobbied for getting
[Guest]: that duty increased so that the profit margin essentially just like ballooned up by the
[Guest]: amount of duty increase. So things like this happen when you take money from big people,
[Guest]: they want big policy level changes from you. Another thing that is happening is that these
[Guest]: companies that are being created, might it be IPAC, ABM that works for BJP, all of these
[Guest]: entities employ a lot of young people who are like highly educated, so they also need
[Guest]: higher salaries than your Karakartas and party workers do. They account for a small amount
[Guest]: per se, because there are very few people like this in the political setup. The largest
[Guest]: political consultancy and the largest set of professionals that there is, it's going
[Guest]: to be about 400 people for a state election. So no matter how highly paid they are, the
[Guest]: compensation is not much compared to what's spent in an election. But there is a difference.
[Guest]: The difference is that these people need to be paid entirely in white money. Like if someone
[Guest]: told me, okay, I am going to pay you in a contract, I will not know what to do with
[Guest]: it. And I'll tell them, no boss, like pay me in my bank account. So that system of like
[Guest]: doling out favors, paying in cash does not work with these set of people. Interestingly,
[Guest]: what has happened is that in a couple of cases, at least the political party is not the one
[Guest]: paying these entities. They've given it out to a corporate. So a corporate is now directly
[Guest]: paying a political consultancy firm, which is working for a political party. So this
[Guest]: money and this entire transaction never comes on the books of the political party. Even
[Guest]: in the books of the corporate, it is actually built as a consultancy expense and not a political
[Guest]: donation because he has paid a private entity to do consultancy work. The consultancy work
[Guest]: is for a political party is a different story altogether. So these new ways are evolving.
[Guest]: Electoral bonds confiscate, like basically obfuscate everything because now you can't
[Guest]: prove in a court of law who paid a political party. What this does is I want a policy change.
[Guest]: I take an electoral bond to you. I tell you, do this policy change and I'm going to pay
[Guest]: you a thousand crores. You do the policy change in my favor. All the competitors die out.
[Guest]: I pay you the thousand crores. This entire transaction can happen on paper and you can
[Guest]: never prove it in the court of law because you can't prove who that thousand crores came
[Guest]: from because electoral bonds are anonymous. So in essence, we have just legalized corruption
[Guest]: in the nation. And because it's from a bank account, people think that it's not corruption.
[Guest]: That's not the case. If there is a quid pro quo involved, it's very much illegal and very
[Guest]: harmful for the nation. But this seems to be the new dominant model of political funding.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, fascinating there. And I want to read out a passage from your book, which kind of
[Amit Varma]: talks about this whole circular motion of money, where money goes into winning elections
[Amit Varma]: and then that in turn makes more money. And you write, quote, through my discussions on
[Amit Varma]: political strategy, I came to know of a particular politician who seems to have built one of
[Amit Varma]: the finest systems of keeping his voters dependent on him. The MLA in question has taken the
[Amit Varma]: nexus of business politics and bribery of voters to a different level. He won the elections
[Amit Varma]: as an independent candidate a few years ago and is reported to distribute a monthly amount
[Amit Varma]: of 1000 to 2000 rupees to about half the people in his constituency. In this extremely impoverished
[Amit Varma]: region, this means that most of the voters in the constituency are dependent on him for
[Amit Varma]: sustenance. Creating this level of dependence in the local population ensures that he will
[Amit Varma]: remain a political force to reckon with in the region, and so on and so forth. And then
[Amit Varma]: you continue, he reportedly funds this entire operation by supporting mining companies in
[Amit Varma]: the district where his constituency is located, and is backed by a contract miner whose company
[Amit Varma]: has become the largest in the region with an increase in turnover from 90 crore to over
[Amit Varma]: 1300 crores in 15 years, stop quote. And what do you say about sort of the centralization
[Amit Varma]: of power leading to a centralization of funding is something that I would actually have expected
[Amit Varma]: to happen earlier, because money always kind of follows power. And of course, in the US
[Amit Varma]: is very explicit. There's a great book by Jonathan Rauch called Government's End, which
[Amit Varma]: kind of describes the power of interest groups over there, engaging in what is essentially
[Amit Varma]: bribery. And the circular motion between money and politics is, you know, is actually easy
[Amit Varma]: to perceive once you start looking for it, you know, so a big company funds, say, a party
[Amit Varma]: and the party comes to power, and the party will then pass a law that helps his big company,
[Amit Varma]: for example, they could have import tariffs so that, you know, their turf is protected
[Amit Varma]: and cheap exports don't flood in and take them away, and so on and so forth. And I think
[Amit Varma]: there are so many policies that you can immediately figure out by looking at them that hey, they
[Amit Varma]: actually harm the people, even though they are, you know, they've got good intentions
[Amit Varma]: behind them. But you can figure out exactly why this policy is there. For example, at
[Amit Varma]: one point, I used to point out how the both the BJP and the Aam Aadmi Party opposed, you
[Amit Varma]: know, FDI in retail, and the BJP I think later changed his mind. But of course, the reason
[Amit Varma]: for that is that small retailers are a big vote bank. In the case of AAP, they are also
[Amit Varma]: big funders for them. So it is natural that they'll want to protect them. And all of this
[Amit Varma]: is under the lofty rhetoric of look, we will protect local manufacturers and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But the unseen effect of all of this is that is the consumers who suffer, that instead
[Amit Varma]: of getting something for 10 rupees, you are you're paying 15 rupees for it. And what you
[Amit Varma]: don't see is what you would have done with the extra 5 rupees had it remained with you.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, there are many knock on effects like local manufacturers would have had to
[Amit Varma]: up their game to compete, and it would just have helped the entire ecosystem. But that
[Amit Varma]: kind of doesn't happen. So whenever you look at a public policy, I'd urge all my listeners
[Amit Varma]: just kind of look at who stands to benefit from it. And it is quite often not the people
[Amit Varma]: of India, but some random cronies. But with that rant over, we now get to sort of your
[Amit Varma]: LAMP fellowship, because one of the intriguing things you said just now in this answer was,
[Amit Varma]: and you said this in the context of the money and fundraising, is that the local MP doesn't
[Amit Varma]: really matter. You know, everything is centralized on top. And as a LAMP fellow, one of the things
[Amit Varma]: that you've described while working with an MP is that Parliament doesn't really matter.
[Amit Varma]: And part of it is because of the anti-defection law of 1985, which basically means that you
[Amit Varma]: can run Parliament from an Excel sheet. And I've done an episode on this a short episode
[Amit Varma]: ages ago with Varun Mitra. But I'd like you to elaborate on this, because you've actually
[Amit Varma]: seen this from the inside, like, did you know, did you go in thinking that, oh, I'll be working
[Amit Varma]: with an MP, I'll be, you know, helping him in the parliamentary debates, we will take
[Amit Varma]: this great nation forward? What was that process like? And how does it really work?
[Guest]: Oh, definitely. So the first time I entered Parliament, I was extremely excited. The building
[Guest]: feels like such an important place. When you enter through multiple layers of security
[Guest]: in Parliament, you get a sense of real purpose and pride and you think, okay, you are at
[Guest]: the center of the country right now where laws are going to get made, where policies
[Guest]: to better the constituency, better the lives of people are going to get made. And when
[Guest]: you spend three months there, you actually don't even want to enter the building anymore.
[Guest]: Because when you realize, okay, like MPs just get to go in and you get to go in through
[Guest]: so many security checks, and you don't see the purpose of it, you actually start feeling
[Guest]: okay, I'll see the Parliament from outside on television. So much easier to do it that
[Guest]: way. What you realize very early on is that anti-defection is a major component of it
[Guest]: because it was brought in so that politicians couldn't jump one party to the other and basically
[Guest]: dismantle one government and bring upon a new government. But the law is framed in such
[Guest]: a way that they can't vote against their own party in any bill, on any legislation, on
[Guest]: anything debated in Parliament, if a whip is issued. And for most legislations that
[Guest]: come about, because most legislations have someone's huge interest tied into it, and
[Guest]: that's why it was written, there is a whip issued for most legislations. So the MPs could
[Guest]: absolutely disagree with it, they still have to vote for whatever the party tells them
[Guest]: to vote for. So their opinion doesn't matter. This was the first realization. With this
[Guest]: comes the fact that they go to Parliament or they don't, it doesn't matter on what laws
[Guest]: are made in the country. If the party in power has the majority and they decide this is the
[Guest]: law, then it is the law. The debates that happen and the speeches that happen there
[Guest]: are in general a show put on for the public. Sometimes the politicians who have spoken
[Guest]: against it will take clips and circulate it on their YouTube pages and Facebook pages
[Guest]: and they'd be telling their constituents, okay, I tried to stand up against this, but
[Guest]: I couldn't do anything, even though they voted for it in the actual motions. The second thing
[Guest]: that you start realizing is that most of the times you don't even know where an MP voted.
[Guest]: Most democracies, you can tell an MP's voting track record. In India, a majority of the
[Guest]: legislation gets passed by voice vote, which is people just saying aye or nay, and the
[Guest]: speaker deciding, okay, I think I hear more ayes, so it's passed now. And this is one
[Guest]: of the major things that was debated in multiple legislations right now, including the farm
[Guest]: bills. And before that, the Aadhaar bill that was passed, it was passed as a money bill,
[Guest]: so it never went to the Rajya Sabha at all. But even in Lok Sabha, a lot of people called
[Guest]: for division, especially on the farm bills. You can hear people on TV saying we want division.
[Guest]: That means they want everyone to go back to their seats and press a button so that it
[Guest]: is known exactly how many people and who voted in what way. But the speaker decided this
[Guest]: wasn't essential. He heard more ayes in the shouting of the parliament and the bill was
[Guest]: passed. So this is how legislation is passed. The parliamentary debates that happen are
[Guest]: valuable in the sense that sometimes data and information comes out, but most times
[Guest]: it's as good as a television debate in a TV studio. The valuable component that I found
[Guest]: there is actually motions and parliamentary questions. Because in parliamentary questions,
[Guest]: it's like an RTI that an MP files, except in RTI, they can write, oh, it will take too
[Guest]: long to compile this information, so we won't. Or we won't give you this information because
[Guest]: it's privileged in this and this way. In parliamentary questions, they have to reply. Even if it
[Guest]: takes them compiling data, creating new tables for it, they will have to spend time and do
[Guest]: it. And because of that, it is the richest source of information and data that exists
[Guest]: in this country. If you want information on any subject, if you want numbers on what was
[Guest]: imported, what was exported, very likely that an MP has asked that question before and it
[Guest]: is listed on the Lok Sabha website. So that as a tool I found to be extremely useful.
[Guest]: But essentially that is useful because that is the only disclosure that the government
[Guest]: does at large. When BJP came to power in 2014, there was a national open data platform to
[Guest]: be created, which would have all data from all government schemes and all data from all
[Guest]: the budgets of all departments. That website exists, but it's not been updated since, say,
[Guest]: 2016-17, no new data is uploaded onto it. So we are still where we were once, where
[Guest]: what the government does with our tax money, what the government does in government schemes
[Guest]: is still a closely guarded secret. The government holds the data, but it's not public, it's
[Guest]: not accessible. The only means to get it is parliamentary questions. But yeah, that was
[Guest]: one component. The other component, sadly, is that MPs have something called the MP-LAD
[Guest]: fund in their constituency. They get to spend five crores every year on local area development.
[Guest]: Five crores for an MP constituency is a very small sum. What it does do is that it provides
[Guest]: the MP some sense of having some power. They don't have the money. They actually have to
[Guest]: write to the district magistrate and request that the money be spent on this project. The
[Guest]: DM decides who the contract will go to, the DM decides implementation. Only what the project
[Guest]: would be is decided by the MP and then he writes a letter. So this entire thing gives
[Guest]: them some semblance of power. In the local area, a politician has no authority whatsoever
[Guest]: on the district administration. In our legal framework, MPs and MLAs are supposed to make
[Guest]: laws within Vidhan Sabha and the parliament. Their power ends there. Within the constituency,
[Guest]: when they tell a district magistrate to do something, a superintendent of police to do
[Guest]: something, some department, rural development, panchayati raj, urban development, any department
[Guest]: to do something, the government officials do it for two reasons. One is because the
[Guest]: politician is powerful enough to talk to the minister, the chief minister, and then the
[Guest]: real administrative authority kicks in. Or in the local area, they want to maintain some
[Guest]: amount of peace. So it's only the nuisance value within a constituency that gives the
[Guest]: politician any value. Other than that, an MP and MLA would not be able to implement
[Guest]: anything. So when we talked about how these Bahubalis and these criminal nexuses came
[Guest]: into power, an important part to understand is also for a local person, these people probably
[Guest]: deliver more value than someone who is highly educated and very calm and is very good at
[Guest]: studying bills and then talking about them in the parliament. Because that is just not
[Guest]: affecting the local person's life. Another important aspect, like we discussed how local
[Guest]: karakartas exchange money sometimes in return for delivering services. I believe that a
[Guest]: strong central authority would decrease corruption. My belief was that local politicians would
[Guest]: be cut out and then corruption will go down. I am sorry to admit that I was extremely wrong
[Guest]: on this. Very surprising fact of this nation, but local politicians are a check and balance
[Guest]: on local bureaucracy. So if you look at something like pensions or PDS, the PDS shop owner and
[Guest]: the official who has to issue your pension and enroll you for the scheme or any government
[Guest]: scheme for that matter, a lot of times the local politician pressurizes him to do some
[Guest]: people without taking money or to not take absurd amounts. There are competing interests.
[Guest]: When the local politician becomes powerless, the official in charge becomes so empowered
[Guest]: that there is no way to circumvent that corruption at all. There is no one to reach out and this
[Guest]: in India has happened in a lot of places. So in a lot of areas where we hear that this
[Guest]: politician is very honest and you hear that corruption has gone up in the state and I
[Guest]: was very surprised. Why would this be the case? If the chief minister is honest, if
[Guest]: these officials are honest at the centre, within the district capital, how can corruption
[Guest]: go up? Then you go to the local constituency and you realize that Tahsildar is not honest
[Guest]: and then you realize the person handling the PDS shops is not honest. And that is where
[Guest]: the corruption arises and there is no system to counter that other than a local Bahubali
[Guest]: politician who earlier used to pressurize him.
[Amit Varma]: Extremely fascinating and at the start of your answer, you pointed out how politicians,
[Amit Varma]: whatever they do in Parliament, they are really just posturing and you have mentioned in your
[Amit Varma]: book that it's the same in TV studios and this is something Barkha Dutt also told me
[Amit Varma]: in the episode I did recently with her that, you know, politicians may believe whatever
[Amit Varma]: and they may be quite reasonable person outside the studio, but they become defenders of the
[Amit Varma]: faith and shouting maniacs, my words not hers, when they are actually in the studio. So it's
[Amit Varma]: all just theatre, it's all political theatre that's playing out and people are watching
[Amit Varma]: news television or, you know, even when it isn't fake news, it is still theatre, which
[Amit Varma]: is really kind of interesting. One of the things that struck me, and I shouldn't say
[Amit Varma]: it's poignant because why would I feel sorry for an MP, that's never going to happen, is
[Amit Varma]: what one could call the legislator paradox, which is you write at one point quote, in
[Amit Varma]: India, almost no one votes for an MP or MLA because of their voting record in legislatures
[Amit Varma]: or because of the kind of bills they have supported. People vote for an MP or MLA with
[Amit Varma]: the expectation that the politician will help solve their everyday issues, stop quote, which
[Amit Varma]: it seems is sensible on the part of people because they've kind of figured out Parliament
[Amit Varma]: doesn't make a difference. Except for what you just said that even at the local level,
[Amit Varma]: they don't have too much power. Like, I don't know how different it is in rural India necessarily.
[Amit Varma]: But in urban India, and I've done an episode ages back on urban governance with Shruti
[Amit Varma]: Rajagopalan, where she lucidly explained the disconnect between power and accountability,
[Amit Varma]: that the local legislator that you're the MP that you're voting for, actually has no
[Amit Varma]: power, you know, if there's, you know, water shortage, or if there are potholes in the
[Amit Varma]: road outside your house, he can't do anything. And the person who can do something, the humble
[Amit Varma]: corporator or whatever, their incentives are different, and they're not actually accountable
[Amit Varma]: to you. This is why government needs to be really as local as possible. So you feel that
[Amit Varma]: there is a point to your vote. Today, someone like me knows that, you know, it doesn't make
[Amit Varma]: a difference. My vote won't solve any of the micro problems around me, like in garbage
[Amit Varma]: collection or whatever. And the macro problems, of course, are not kind of going to be solved
[Amit Varma]: either. So during this LAMP fellowship, you've written about one, your disillusionment with
[Amit Varma]: the way it was, but the MP you were working with, Premdas Rai of Sikkim Democratic Front,
[Amit Varma]: seems a fascinating man. He was IIT, IIM, and he got this also. So as you went through
[Amit Varma]: your LAMP fellowship, you clearly decided that even though, you know, this parliament
[Amit Varma]: thing was a sham, that politics was worthwhile. So what were the kind of lessons you were
[Amit Varma]: learning? And what was the next move that you made? What was kind of driving you forward
[Amit Varma]: at this point? What was your vision of yourself? Like, one of the things I'm really interested
[Amit Varma]: in, and I can't ask you to elaborate at every different part of your life, obviously, but
[Amit Varma]: I'm also interested in how the conception of yourself was changing, you know, from I
[Amit Varma]: want to do this, this is what I want to be. And I am certain that that must have been
[Amit Varma]: kind of changing in either subtle or perhaps very big ways through this entire journey.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about it at this point in time. And what did you do next?
[Guest]: So I learned a very important lesson from Mr. P.D. Rai, an excellent MP who understood
[Guest]: that you could deliver even without parliament. So what he chose to do instead was engage
[Guest]: a lot of civil society organisations, create a lot of entities and groups of MPs. So he
[Guest]: created a North-East MPs forum where all the North-East MPs discussed North-East specific
[Guest]: issues. He worked on something called the Sustainable Mountain Development Summit that
[Guest]: brought together all legislators from the 11 mountain states of India to discuss sustainable
[Guest]: development issues. He worked on the drug problem in Sikkim, worked on organic agriculture,
[Guest]: worked with the Population Foundation of India on population control. So things like this
[Guest]: with entities outside parliament, he was able to do it because he had the tag of being a
[Guest]: member of parliament. So that tag and that branding helps. Even when you are talking
[Guest]: to a local, say, official to get a road built, because you are an MP, they are likely to
[Guest]: listen to you out of a sense of respect and the aura of power that you create around you.
[Guest]: This again was an electoral lesson in a way because I realised a lot of famous names,
[Guest]: a lot of politicians that are famous who are known to not do anything in their constituency
[Guest]: still continue to win. The reason they win is that constituents realise that famous name
[Guest]: for an MP matters. If your MP is a known name, your official would listen to your MP. If
[Guest]: your MP is an unknown entity and a non-political heavyweight, no one's going to listen to him.
[Guest]: And there is no actual authority. It is all based on the aura and the image. So it made
[Guest]: sense. Politics, I realised, is something that affects the country disproportionately
[Guest]: and disproportionately because it's not the most important thing in the country at all.
[Guest]: My personal belief system working in politics and in the parliament is that the country
[Guest]: that does the best on the whole, economically, socially, on human development, are countries
[Guest]: where politics matters less and less. The more valuable a nation's political posts are,
[Guest]: the worse off it is in all indicators of human development and all indicators of economic
[Guest]: development. In India, politics is disproportionately important and it occupies a central theme
[Guest]: in people's conversation. It's essentially like cricket, Bollywood and politics. And
[Guest]: politics is more universal than the other two. Because of this, I felt it's an important
[Guest]: area to be involved in. What I realised was being in policy, I would always be someone
[Guest]: who's like creating research, creating reports, and then anyone above me would not do much
[Guest]: with it. So it's a very low impact field and low impact things are in general, quite frustrating
[Guest]: in life for everyone. I realised that the highest impact space was actually working
[Guest]: in direct politics, where one, it's a short turnaround time. So whatever you do shows
[Guest]: its results in eight months, nine months. You're not waiting for, say, a five-year thing
[Guest]: because you're working on different states, different elections. So whatever you've done
[Guest]: now, you'll know if it's been a success or not within nine months. That was the first
[Guest]: incentive. The second incentive was that I believed, so did a lot of people who joined
[Guest]: CAG before me and a lot of people who were in IPAC, is that once you help a politician
[Guest]: win an election, you will have some say in governance and policy, and you will be able
[Guest]: to shape at least some of the things in the right direction. It's not been the case largely
[Guest]: for any entity in India. I think the person who's come the closest is actually Prashant
[Guest]: Kishore. He tried a couple of times in a couple of different states, also got Bihar Vikas
[Guest]: Mission made in Bihar, which was supposed to be a developmental entity, created a company
[Guest]: called Citizens Alliance to do this entire work, tried to get people embedded in Mamta
[Guest]: Banerjee's cabinet offices, like young consultants within the political setup, tried earlier
[Guest]: with the BJP after the 2014 elections, because of which he largely exited out of the BJP.
[Guest]: So it's been a theme. He came the closest and did not succeed. I also believe that I
[Guest]: would have at least some say in policymaking. Largely not the case. Winning elections is
[Guest]: very different from governance. As soon as an election is won, people realize the utility
[Guest]: of all of the work that you did, but it will not translate into anything like happening
[Guest]: towards development. The prime example that I have of this, we do electoral surveys, and
[Guest]: we do really granular surveys at the village level and the district level. We know what
[Guest]: the biggest demand is in, say, a panchayat. So we will know that this bridge is not being
[Guest]: built, it's impacting 1,800 people of this region, and 43% of the people want this done.
[Guest]: So really granular data like that. And we compile it into an app, which is essentially
[Guest]: listing literally panchayat-wise what the biggest three issues are. And this happens
[Guest]: for an entire constituency and an entire state. My expectation after a lot of the elections
[Guest]: was that the political party and the CM will go through this. And my belief was, if he
[Guest]: fixes even one of these top three problems, everyone's going to support him. No one goes
[Guest]: back to that data. We realized very early on that no one's looked at the app again.
[Guest]: Once the elections won, the attention shifted to a completely different part. The same exercise
[Guest]: and the same data collection will happen again before the next election, where they'll promise
[Guest]: when they go there, they will tell you exactly, I am the chief minister or I am the prime
[Guest]: minister, and I still know about this nala in this tiny little hamlet of 300 people.
[Guest]: And people will be really impressed that this man pays so much attention that he knows about
[Guest]: a nala in this tiny hamlet. Except it's all data that's collected for that election. After
[Guest]: the election, no one opens it again. So very sad, but also helped me shape the decision
[Guest]: that I don't want to be in the policy content creation space, which is also like a space
[Guest]: in general where you can write about policies. I decided to be in direct electoral politics.
[Guest]: Still do the political campaigning work, which allows you to create some amount of impact
[Guest]: in who comes to power. What this translates into, I'm still uncertain. So like you asked
[Guest]: about what the trajectory is in life. It would be direct electoral politics, but it would
[Guest]: only be direct electoral politics like 15, 20 years down the line. The reason for that
[Guest]: is that I personally know how difficult politics is one and I know how expensive politics is.
[Guest]: And third of all, I also understand that once you are in it, you can't exit out. Like if
[Guest]: you go into politics and then you come out, take a break for like three years, then you
[Guest]: go back into politics. That's not going to work. It's not like a regular career where
[Guest]: you can try out a startup and then apply it to your next job. If you do this in and out
[Guest]: even once, you are done for. It's very easy to get branded as a non-serious politician.
[Guest]: So win or lose, you stay in the constituency, you keep fighting it out, and you present
[Guest]: yourself as the next in line. So you have to be the alternate. And whenever the people
[Guest]: get frustrated with the incumbent, you're going to come into power. Every decent political
[Guest]: party and every politician who's come into power has stayed as the opposition for a decently
[Amit Varma]: long period of time.
[Amit Varma]: You're describing it like Hotel California, you can check out, but you can never leave.
[Amit Varma]: And the correlation you drew earlier is interesting, where you said that where there is too much
[Amit Varma]: politics, those countries tend to be the least developed. And I would say that both of those,
[Amit Varma]: both too much politics and too little development actually comes from the same cause, which
[Amit Varma]: is the state being too powerful. Because if the state is too powerful, then obviously
[Amit Varma]: the incentive for people to join politics is to become part of that gravy chain, they're
[Amit Varma]: attracted to power and money and not to service as it were, or, you know, whatever else. And
[Amit Varma]: equally, you know, it's underdeveloped because the state is just not letting, you know, people
[Amit Varma]: flourish. It's got its finger in every pie. It leads to a rent-seeking mentality rather
[Amit Varma]: than a profit-seeking mentality. And it's a mess all around. So now at this point, you
[Amit Varma]: kind of decide that, okay, I'm going to, you know, get into the thick of things, you join
[Amit Varma]: Prashant Kishore's political consultancy, and you go to Punjab for the Punjab elections
[Amit Varma]: to help Amrindar Singh. And it's really interesting because I have thought of Amrindar Singh over
[Amit Varma]: the last three or four years as everyone has as captain. But you point out that that was
[Amit Varma]: actually a brand makeover, which to some extent you guys were responsible for that because
[Amit Varma]: he was earlier like a Maharaja, he was an elite out of touch with the people. And you
[Amit Varma]: guys did a complete brand makeover, which is essentially also what politics is entirely
[Amit Varma]: about. So tell me a little bit about that you dive into it, you go to Chandigarh, there
[Amit Varma]: is this bungalow which has been given by a supporter. And that's where you have to work.
[Amit Varma]: What is that sort of experience like? And what are the interesting things that you learn,
[Amit Varma]: you know, over your first few days there and then just over the whole process?
[Guest]: So once we are there, we actually do some surveys on the ground, we assess what Amrindar
[Guest]: Singh's image is. And at that point of time, he is actually known as Maharaj. And that
[Guest]: is what people call him. This captain phenomenon is entirely something that got built in 2016-17.
[Guest]: And it stuck so well, because all the branding was centered around it. So once there were
[Guest]: a couple of problems that came out in surveys and focus group discussions. So how this works
[Guest]: is that you do on ground surveys where there are like quantitative questions, but you also
[Guest]: do focus groups, where you call say, youth between the age group of 18 and 25 of different
[Guest]: caste groups, you take their feedback on a lot of issues, then you call say women take
[Guest]: their feedback. And you see how different demographic groups, different caste groups
[Guest]: are reacting to the same questions. You assess what groups you are strong in what groups
[Guest]: you are weak in, you do an analysis like that. So we realized there were three universal
[Guest]: problems. The first universal problem was obviously the image that lazy Maharaja doesn't
[Guest]: do anything. That was the first part of it. The second one was that he doesn't visit constituencies
[Guest]: at all. And anytime that he's won, he's become inaccessible to the people entirely. And the
[Guest]: third one was basically around his like Maharaja's properties, which had been like taken over
[Guest]: in general. Now he was trying to get it back, he had loans, then he tried to pay loans,
[Guest]: and he was going to be extremely corrupt to get his properties out. So these three themes
[Guest]: kind of interrelated, but a lot of people in Punjab knew about these. What weren't issues
[Guest]: was also very surprising to me, a lot of personal issues Punjab politicians did not care about
[Guest]: at all. Like, you can have affairs, no one cares about that in Punjab politics. A politician
[Guest]: could do drugs as much as he wanted. No one cared about that in Punjab politics. You could
[Guest]: be a public drunk, no one cared about that, which was very different from like UP and
[Guest]: Bihar politics for me, because like the overt display of morality is a very UP-Bihar thing.
[Guest]: So yeah, after realizing these things, the team got together, decided on, okay, how do
[Guest]: we fix all of this? The first one, it was decided that, okay, like he was a captain
[Guest]: in the Indian Army, there is a lot of respect for the Indian Army, you brand him into Captain
[Guest]: Amrindar Singh from Maharaj Amrindar Singh. Multiple things happened for that. The second
[Guest]: one, a campaign was started called Halkevich Captain. It was announced that Halka is an
[Guest]: assembly constituency in Punjab. It was announced that he would visit all 117 assembly constituencies
[Guest]: of Punjab and collect people's problems. So people would give him problems in writing.
[Guest]: And then within 100 days of forming the government, he'll create a task force that will go through
[Guest]: all of these problems and find a solution for them. And the third one, when it came
[Guest]: to like corruption in cases and this and that, an aggressive captain was something that we
[Guest]: realized would be a positive image, where he speaks up against social issues, against
[Guest]: fake FIRs filed against corruption. So a campaign was launched for that. But the first one,
[Guest]: the Captain Amrindar Singh, the rebranding was by far the most successful thing that
[Guest]: was done in Punjab. And the campaign itself was essentially Captain Di Sarkar. Ki Chanda
[Guest]: Hai Punjab, Captain Di Sarkar. It wasn't even Amrindar Singh anywhere. So music, the movies
[Guest]: that were made, all of the advertisement that came in newspapers and TVs, all of that focused
[Guest]: upon that. So I definitely realized the value of branding, but it also reinforced my belief
[Guest]: in collecting data and information. Because once you have data and ground feedback, and
[Guest]: once you know how each demographic is voting and you know which demographic group is where
[Guest]: in a constituency, you can create campaigns to address issues. Most politicians in the
[Guest]: country actually fail at the first level. And that was my takeaway even in 2019. Like
[Guest]: looking at the elections, the Congress Party lost, largely because they did not even recognize
[Guest]: what issue the election was being fought. Like they talked about Nyaya, but they never
[Guest]: assessed who was hearing it. So the CSDS has also collected data on it. More rich taxpayers
[Guest]: who would be paying for Nyaya heard about it than people who would be beneficiaries.
[Guest]: If you look at something like Rafale, they did not accept that it wasn't working. Multiple
[Guest]: reasons that it wasn't. It wasn't actually Rahul Gandhi's fault. It was also local politicians
[Guest]: within the Congress did not believe in these campaigns. So they weren't popularizing them.
[Guest]: Congress MP candidates, MLA candidates have never popularized these schemes. It has largely
[Guest]: just been the Gandhi family who's talked about it. Election itself, though, was being fought
[Guest]: on Modi's image. It was being fought on the Hindu pride theme, on the developmental model
[Guest]: of Narendra Modi and on the Balakota strikes and like the strength that the nation showed.
[Guest]: So without dismantling these key pillars on which the election was being fought, or creating
[Guest]: new pillars entirely, you couldn't counter the campaign. Whatever you did was just on
[Guest]: a tangent, which did not affect the election results at all. So yeah, in Punjab, the branding
[Guest]: was so overpowering, that whatever else anyone else did was not impacting the votes at all.
[Amit Varma]: What you also described really well, when you write about your Punjab experience is
[Amit Varma]: how much of it has to do with event management. Like number one, you write that developmental
[Amit Varma]: activity interactions with constituents, politicians look at them as a way to build their brand.
[Amit Varma]: So the event per se, whatever it's for the proximate reason doesn't really matter. You're
[Amit Varma]: building your brand, everything has to be focused on that. You also had another great
[Amit Varma]: slogan coffee with captain, which is a bit like chai pe charcha. I saw that and I immediately
[Amit Varma]: thought okay talk show man, he should now that he's out of politics, he should just
[Amit Varma]: do a podcast coffee with captain. You know, Navjot Siddhu can be his first guest and he
[Amit Varma]: can poison his coffee or something. And also your own sort of excellence in this this department
[Amit Varma]: like you're overseeing an operation where you know, there are autos with sound systems
[Amit Varma]: and banners going from village to village. And of course, your particular speciality,
[Amit Varma]: I don't know why they don't call you poster boy of just, you know, getting posters plastered
[Amit Varma]: all over the villages and towns and constituencies of Punjab. You were apparently an expert in
[Amit Varma]: preparing Lai or Leti, which apparently is that thing you prepare with which, you know,
[Amit Varma]: once you stick it, you can't take the poster off, you know, half the wall only will scrape
[Amit Varma]: off if you try to take the poster off. So how did you kind of discover that and also
[Amit Varma]: what happens is that foreign educated kids come back to India, they don't want to do
[Amit Varma]: this kind of, you know, manual shit, of course, they want to go to the grassroots, but they
[Amit Varma]: want to collect data and, you know, may draw intellectual conclusions, but you were out
[Amit Varma]: there getting your hands dirty. So tell me a little bit about that. Was it an enjoyable
[Amit Varma]: process? You know, and also, is there a similar enthusiasm in that across party ranks? Like,
[Amit Varma]: do party workers go through the motions or are there innovative things being tried out
[Amit Varma]: all the time? And once you have one vision, that listen, this is our brand, we are talking
[Amit Varma]: about issue X and not issue, you know, ABC, and that we got to stay on message and all
[Amit Varma]: of that. How easy is it to kind of then bring that kind of discipline within the party,
[Amit Varma]: especially as an outsider?
[Guest]: So the extremely interesting experience of had never prepared lie in my life before,
[Guest]: but this was the first Hulkevich. What is the formula? What is the formula? So it's
[Guest]: actually made out of aata. So what you do is that you heat up water essentially, and
[Guest]: then you make a paste out of aata. What this does is that once you pasted it on, if you
[Guest]: pull it off, it's just going to pull off like one tiny layer, it's not going to pull off
[Guest]: the entire poster. So like, it's going to literally involve scraping up the entire wall
[Guest]: if you want it off. Very old preparation in politics. But obviously, we were political
[Guest]: consultants, we weren't political karekarta, so we hadn't done it. So we decided that okay,
[Guest]: posters need to be planted because the entire town was looking very bland. And this was
[Guest]: the first Hulkevich captain. So it had to look extremely grand. And it had to look that
[Guest]: like captain had come here, because he's going to meet like what 5000 6000 people in an assembly
[Guest]: constituency. How do the rest of the people know that he came to this constituency? The
[Guest]: right way to do it was one autos with speakers across the constituency blasting that he's
[Guest]: going to come here on this date that happened. But once the autos leave, how do people remember?
[Guest]: And that's where these small posters come in. Big hoardings are there on like main highways,
[Guest]: but like most people don't see it every day. The only thing that reaches like internal
[Guest]: villages are these like stickers and posters. So obviously had to happen. We called up Chandigarh
[Guest]: and ordered these posters, the graphic design part and like the data part is actually easy.
[Guest]: It is the logistics of elections that is actually the complicated part. So the posters came
[Guest]: very late. The people that we'd actually gotten together to paste the posters, they were willing
[Guest]: to like just run away by then. Very interesting story on how we kept them there. They were
[Guest]: like, essentially like auto drivers and truck drivers to take us around some youth congress
[Guest]: karakartas. So the youth congress karakartas were obviously there because they saw it as
[Guest]: a job. And also like Punjab is one of those states where like the BJYM and youth congress
[Guest]: karakartas all come from extremely rich families. So to post posters at night, they would bring
[Guest]: an Audi and a BMW. So they are chilling in their Audi's waiting there for like the posters
[Guest]: to arrive. But the labour at that point of time was just willing to run away. They were
[Guest]: like, we don't even want money. Forget this. We waited here for three hours. We are not
[Guest]: doing it. And in a situation like this, you realise that you have to do something. So
[Guest]: we had this guy who went and talked to them and basically told them, what do you want?
[Guest]: So they realised that the good way to keep them there was to actually buy them like really
[Guest]: cheap alcohol so that all of them like sat there and got drunk by the time that posters
[Guest]: came and they'd happily sit there. So he brings it and sits there. By that time, we've been
[Guest]: making Lahi as much as we can make in watts. And for that, like we hire a dhaba persons
[Guest]: cooking utensils. Someone from youth congress gets like the aata and all itself from his
[Guest]: house. So very funny situation. And they realise that we don't know what we are doing. So this
[Guest]: like dhaba person is like, bhai, kiya viya toh hai, tumne dikh raha hai. I'll help you.
[Guest]: And suddenly like this is the great thing about India in general. When you're completely
[Guest]: messing up and making a fool of yourself, random people come out from here and there
[Guest]: and start helping you. So we had a lot of villagers come who are helping us make this
[Guest]: thing standing there at 8.30, 9 at night. Posters came by 12.30. We started pasting
[Guest]: them. And this entire process happens. And the event is a huge success. Everyone is very
[Guest]: happy. Prashant Kishore is very happy. What happens next really surprised me though. They
[Guest]: go to the next town for the next Thalkevich Captain event. I am not in charge of that
[Guest]: event at all. But suddenly, like the next town, people realise they have no idea how
[Guest]: to paste these posters. And they have no idea of how lie gets prepared. So they start calling
[Guest]: me up and I become the guy to ask for like the recipe of making this thing. So yeah,
[Guest]: obviously, like very different experience from like studying economics at the University
[Guest]: of Michigan. But again, very interesting experience. And this is essentially what the nation's
[Guest]: politics is. Data matters, information matters. The analysis that you can do matters, survey
[Guest]: matters, everything matters. But if you are not able to go out to the ground, you're going
[Guest]: to fail. Whatever you might do at the narrative creation level will not translate till you
[Guest]: have this structure in place. So we all know that BJP has a very strong card. We also know
[Guest]: it has a huge social media presence, a huge data analytics team. It's very strong in controlling
[Guest]: the media and managing the larger narrative. But you see where the BJP is losing. If you
[Guest]: look at state elections since say 2018, then wherever there is a strong regional party,
[Guest]: the BJP has actually lost. So Maharashtra, it lost essentially because of an alliance.
[Guest]: But it also lost Madhya Pradesh. It also lost Rajasthan. It also lost Karnataka. It lost
[Guest]: West Bengal. So all of these states that it's been losing, it's happened because there is
[Guest]: a strong regional force over there, who's overpowered the card. So an election like
[Guest]: West Bengal, essentially Mamata Banerjee has so much larger of a carder within the state
[Guest]: of West Bengal that the BJP carder cannot function to the same efficiency at all. So
[Guest]: even when they have the narrative control, if you looked at Delhi media, then everyone
[Guest]: was sure that BJP is going to sweep West Bengal. And I've written multiple Twitter threads
[Guest]: telling people that this is not the reality on the ground. This is not the reality on
[Guest]: the ground. And it's just the media saying that the BJP is sweeping West Bengal. But
[Guest]: that became the dominant narrative. Whoever you spoke to told you, oh, BJP is winning
[Guest]: West Bengal. In some cases, these things become self-fulfilling prophecies. In this case,
[Guest]: though, it was very certain that it wouldn't become one just because TMC had such a strong
[Guest]: card on the ground. So their messaging and right now during the farmer protest, this
[Guest]: ties in very well with this, because I was talking to someone from Western UP. He's a
[Guest]: local leader type person in his village. And I was like, OK, BJP is circulating these WhatsApp
[Guest]: forwards. And they'd all seen these WhatsApp forwards. And he literally told me that whatever
[Guest]: you want to circulate, do it on WhatsApp. Here, at every corner, Tauji is spitting hookah
[Guest]: and explaining why the law is wrong. No amount of WhatsApp forwards can tackle Tauji with
[Guest]: a hookah. And I was completely sure that, OK, this makes absolute sense. And then I
[Guest]: went and talked to more people on the ground. Their understanding of why they are protesting
[Guest]: against the farm bill is much stronger than what's presented in, say, Delhi media or within
[Guest]: the community that's not an agricultural community or within other farmers who've never gotten
[Guest]: MSP. So yeah, on ground, Gada matters. So politics essentially is narrative, is data,
[Guest]: is everything. But it is event management and building an organization. And that is
[Guest]: the tougher job, because you can hire people to do the data. You can hire people to do
[Guest]: the branding. You can hire big companies who create huge slogans for you, big branding
[Guest]: exercises. You can do all of that. But the Gada building is something that takes years
[Guest]: and years and years of effort. It is something that takes constant resources being pooled
[Guest]: in. If you look at a political party, then the party has offices at every district, at
[Guest]: least. Some have committees at the booth level. To sustain a structure like that in a state
[Guest]: like, say, Uttar Pradesh, 80 MP constituencies, 404 assembly constituencies, 56,000 panchayats,
[Guest]: the number of people it involves, the amount of resources it involves is just beyond comprehension
[Guest]: for most people till they go and see it. Once they do go and see it, they realize, OK, running
[Guest]: a political party is such a difficult job that no one who wants anything for themselves
[Guest]: and knows any kind of skill would want to do it for personal success. So ultimately,
[Guest]: it's going to be people who realize this is their best shot.
[Amit Varma]: Fascinating. And that image of Tauji with a hookah is like so incredibly powerful. In
[Amit Varma]: your next book, you should have Tauji with a hookah on the cover, please. And I'm also
[Amit Varma]: sort of struck by just what a great metaphor Lai is. Like atta, which should be used for
[Amit Varma]: feeding people, is instead used for sticking up posters to sell a narrative, which seems
[Amit Varma]: like an apt narrative to me. Another sort of interesting insight in this chapter, in
[Amit Varma]: your chapter on working with Amrindar Singh in Punjab on that particular campaign, was
[Amit Varma]: about brand building, which you've written a lot about. And at one point, you point out
[Amit Varma]: very pithily that if you don't build your own brand, someone else will. And the example
[Amit Varma]: of that, of course, is Rahul Gandhi, who, you know, didn't build a strong enough brand
[Amit Varma]: for himself. So the BJP built one for him, you know, with Pappu and this and that, and
[Amit Varma]: it kind of stuck, because he didn't do enough on that. And when, you know, he tried to return
[Amit Varma]: the favour and talk about Modi being sootboot ki sarkar and all that, that didn't really
[Amit Varma]: stick so much, because the BJP was far better at narrative management. Now, at this point,
[Amit Varma]: I have a broader question for you, which is that you start off getting interested in politics,
[Amit Varma]: because you look at what's happening in the early 2010s, when India against corruption
[Amit Varma]: comes and you see how messed up the system is. And you realise that there needs to be
[Amit Varma]: a change. Modi seems to represent that change. So you join the BJP in 2013. Then you do
[Amit Varma]: the lamp fellowship where you are assigned to this other party that of course is not
[Amit Varma]: in your control. But then you join Prashant Kishore and now you're with the Congress.
[Amit Varma]: And then after this, of course, you go to the BJP and you work with Ram Madhav in the
[Amit Varma]: Northeast. And after that, you choose to leave the BJP for extremely well articulated reasons.
[Amit Varma]: But during this period of time, when you're working as a political consultant, one day
[Amit Varma]: it's for BJP, one day it's for Congress, then it's back to BJP. Is there a sense of kind
[Amit Varma]: of cognitive dissonance in the sense that where you're looking at it is that I want
[Amit Varma]: to learn how politics works. So I will just focus on the process. And I won't overthink
[Amit Varma]: other issues. And let there be an implicit assumption that they're all the same. Anyway,
[Amit Varma]: I'm here to do a job and to learn a skill. Or is there a point in time where you know,
[Amit Varma]: and that's exactly what seems to have happened in the case of your getting disillusioned
[Amit Varma]: with the BJP, where you think that no, these principles matter, what these people stand
[Amit Varma]: for matter, what they deliver matters. And of course, we know that what you take to win
[Amit Varma]: elections, the narratives you build have nothing at all to do with governance. So completely
[Amit Varma]: different skills, which is why a party that is incredibly good at winning elections can
[Amit Varma]: be terrible at governance, which you know, we see all around us in practically every
[Amit Varma]: government that there is. So tell me a little bit about that internal process for you that
[Amit Varma]: do you have misgivings? Do you ever sit back and think what are these kind of people that
[Amit Varma]: I'm working with? Do you feel that that kind of disengagement between the immediate proximate
[Amit Varma]: project and the larger thing that's going on is sort of an issue for you?
[Guest]: So there are two parts to it. The first part is that I believe as a citizen of a democracy,
[Guest]: you are not supposed to have a party that you belong to. As in as a voter, your job
[Guest]: is not to be like a loyal subject of a political party. Your job is to look at the choices
[Guest]: and see who is going to be the best for the nation and for you at that point in time.
[Guest]: So these things transform pretty fast in general, like the Vajpayee Bharatiya Janata Party is
[Guest]: not the Bharatiya Janata Party under Narendra Modi. Like the Congress under Indira Gandhi
[Guest]: is not the Congress of today. So these things transform, the parties transform. A lot of
[Guest]: people buy into this entire narrative of, okay, I belong to this political party. I
[Guest]: have always believed that I'm not supposed to belong to a political party. I'm supposed
[Guest]: to choose what is the best at that point of time. Whose leadership is the best? What does
[Guest]: the country require? Is the structure of the political party good enough to deliver on
[Guest]: what they say they are going to deliver? The second part of it is that working as a professional
[Guest]: in politics, you do tend to disengage from the politics of the political party itself.
[Guest]: Important part in these campaigns for me was that I actually did really believe that the
[Guest]: country required a change in 2014. A major part of that was also just the narrative that
[Guest]: was built around all of us, and especially around me, that I did not realise how the
[Guest]: narrative was getting built. At that time, I had no experience in realising how these
[Guest]: things happened. Now looking back at it, I can tell how a lot of things were structured,
[Guest]: why a lot of different events happened, but at that point of time, like absolutely got
[Guest]: taken in by that. Very similar thing in Punjab that I did support Captain Amrindar Singh
[Guest]: and Congress over the Akali Dal. A large part of it is the drug allegations, a part of it
[Guest]: is also the crony capitalism that happened in Punjab. So thankfully, I always was supporting
[Guest]: the side I've worked with. And that's been true till date. But very honestly, even if
[Guest]: there is a side that I did not completely like buy into politically, I would probably
[Guest]: still do my best to provide like whatever data they needed, whatever support they needed,
[Guest]: if they were a client. So that amount of disconnect does exist there, even though it's not like
[Guest]: come into play as of right now. Very interesting part between being a professional in politics
[Guest]: and actually being in politics is that you get to make this distinction. You are helping
[Guest]: someone when you are helping someone come to power, but you are someone who's providing
[Guest]: like one particular set of service. A lot of political consultants go out and claim
[Guest]: that they helped this party win and like the party won because of them. I have never found
[Guest]: this to be the case for anyone. A lot of people contribute into a political process coming
[Guest]: together and a party winning. And you are like as anyone, no matter how big you are,
[Guest]: you are a part of the process and a cog in the wheel. You'd only be able to do it very
[Guest]: well if you truly believe in that moment that you're doing the right thing. I've found in
[Guest]: my life, at least there are very few people, even in politics, who can do the wrong thing
[Guest]: while believing it's the wrong thing. Most of them do the wrong things, but they believe
[Guest]: they're doing the right thing or doing it for the right reason. So that self-justification
[Guest]: exists within all of us, including me for every project that I've worked on. But yes,
[Guest]: overarching belief still remains that you're not supposed to be the supporter of any political
[Guest]: party. You're supposed to decide who's best at that moment.
[Amit Varma]: So that's, you know, I love the part of your answer about how in a democracy, you should
[Amit Varma]: never be a bhakta of one party, as it were. Like, you know, I always keep saying that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, my loyalties lie to my principles. And from those principles will flow support
[Amit Varma]: for particular policies or whatever. And I'm not tribal in that sense. So it might seem
[Amit Varma]: like I am saying something good about a particular party one day and bad about the particular
[Amit Varma]: party the next day. But it's simply that I'm going on the basis of those principles or
[Amit Varma]: those policies and all of that. While I think too much of politics in India has become incredibly
[Amit Varma]: tribal where people get into these hardened positions, where everything that for example,
[Amit Varma]: the Modi government does is either right for one set of people or wrong for another set
[Amit Varma]: of people. And there can be no exceptions at all. And that simply doesn't make any sense
[Amit Varma]: to me. So I found that quite resonant. Now that the interesting part of your journey
[Amit Varma]: is like, where you point out your realization that political consultants are doing the same
[Amit Varma]: for themselves, what they are doing for their parties, they're building a narrative, they're
[Amit Varma]: crafting an image that isn't entirely true. And you point out that what you know, Prashant
[Amit Varma]: Kishore's gang was really good at was event management and PR, but they weren't really
[Amit Varma]: making a greater difference in that which kind of disillusioned you when you said that
[Amit Varma]: you know, to hell with this political consultants, like many people think of management consultants,
[Amit Varma]: perhaps, I don't know with how much justification, but these consultants are just paid too much
[Amit Varma]: money at one point in your book, you point out that they would take crores for a job
[Amit Varma]: that the parties figured out would only take lakhs. And you decided to actually jump into
[Amit Varma]: working within a party itself. So tell me about how that came about and where that took
[Guest]: you next.
[Guest]: So yes, my personal belief system is that eventually every party will have to do everything
[Guest]: a political consultant does in-house. This entire space of political consultancy is a
[Guest]: dangerous space in a way, because they work for one party, they collect all of the data
[Guest]: from within that party and for that party, and then they retain it till the next elections.
[Guest]: And there is no guarantee that they will not switch sides. It's not some sort of a cult
[Guest]: state where like, you're not ever allowed to leave. If you look at most political consultants,
[Guest]: they have worked with multiple political parties, and sometimes multiple political parties in
[Guest]: the state over like same state over two different elections. So things like that have made me
[Guest]: very sure that the field itself will not last very long. It's a blip in the democratic setup.
[Guest]: Eventually, there will be political consultants, but they're going to be employees of the political
[Guest]: party itself. So after this realisation, and after realising that my interest in it wasn't
[Guest]: to become like some famous consultant who manages elections, I actually wanted to do
[Guest]: political things. I actually wanted to make policy difference. And I actually wanted to
[Guest]: make like differences within the party structure, the party hierarchy. And I realised that the
[Guest]: right way to do this was to work with like a big party leader and like work on a state
[Guest]: election as someone who is heading the state campaign. A big part of this also was that
[Guest]: when I moved to the North East and started working with BJP, I was heading a lot of the
[Guest]: operations within IPAC, I was still like a pretty junior consultant. So that opportunity
[Guest]: made sense in the sense of like doing more broader work for a political party doing more
[Guest]: intensive data work, because that is what BJP was also looking for and what I wanted
[Guest]: to do. So made this switch. I resigned from IPAC. By that time, I had this offer to move
[Guest]: to Manipur and just start working on that one state election campaign. And this was
[Guest]: the National General Secretary, Ram Madhavji, heading that entire campaign for that state.
[Guest]: So moved there, actually spent like two days in Delhi, packed up and headed down to Manipur.
[Guest]: Spent a good eight months there. Extremely interesting experience. I still sometimes
[Guest]: remark on how much easier it is to work for the BJP than to work against the BJP. A couple
[Guest]: of reasons for that. Now that the entire intelligence agencies after you think has come about and
[Guest]: is public, that is definitely a part of it. While working for the opposition, you do feel
[Guest]: some amount of pressure. But more than that, it is just the resource difference. Working
[Guest]: for the BJP, you can literally like get a helicopter requisition and go to a different
[Guest]: state the same day. No one asks you much. Our hotel bills, no one ever questioned anything.
[Guest]: So for a lot of karakartas, they did. They never for us. So a lot of karakartas used
[Guest]: to come to our hotel room to order their food. So just things like that, very tiny little
[Guest]: things. You want 10 cars going somewhere, you will get 10 cars. You want some data collected
[Guest]: from somewhere, that data will get collected. So BJP that way, much stronger party. The
[Guest]: ground carder also like a lot of people believe in the social cause of it, the social cause
[Guest]: of Hindutva enough that they would spend more energy on it without looking for an immediate
[Guest]: return. They will like any human being want recognition of their contribution. They will
[Guest]: want party leaders to know about it. They will want you to talk them up. But that is
[Guest]: all it will take for them to like do a lot more than other political parties, karakartas.
[Guest]: And a lot of parties had this. It's not like BJP is the only one. A lot of state parties,
[Guest]: a lot of regional parties have a very dedicated carder, especially within caste groups. If
[Guest]: it's a caste-based party, if you look at someone like the Shiv Sena has an extremely
[Guest]: strong carder. Mamata Banerjee has an extremely strong carder. DMK that way probably has a
[Guest]: stronger carder than BJP within the state. So these carders exist at the regional level.
[Guest]: It's just at the national level that you realize it's so much easier working for the BJP.
[Amit Varma]: Really fascinating. And a quick aside, since you mentioned Mamata a few times, I was just
[Amit Varma]: chatting with a friend in the know a couple of days back. And he told me that Sourav Ganguly
[Amit Varma]: is in a massive vidam bana now. Because on the one hand, during his career, he was kind
[Amit Varma]: of helped by Mamata at different points, I believe he got land for his academy and all
[Amit Varma]: of that which the government gives. So he can't mess with her. She's extremely powerful
[Amit Varma]: in Calcutta. And in fact, in Bengal, I mean, someone told me that BJP may not have a carder
[Amit Varma]: there anymore, because you're getting knocked off, which is a fascinating kind of reason
[Amit Varma]: and might be a little exaggerated, but rings a little true as well. But apparently, the
[Amit Varma]: BJP has been after Sourav to join them because he's exactly the kind of face that they need
[Amit Varma]: in Bengal. And he can't do that because he doesn't want to piss Mamata off. So there
[Amit Varma]: was in fact, a rumor that he faked his heart attack recently, because he just wanted to
[Amit Varma]: get away from having to take a decision. And of course, he's, you know, he's the president
[Amit Varma]: of the BCCI, but Amit Shah's son basically runs the whole thing. So it's quite hilarious.
[Amit Varma]: And for someone who's, who was a pretty political animal in his cricketing days, in the sense
[Amit Varma]: of political within the cricketing world, I know plenty of people who are feeling a
[Amit Varma]: little bit of schadenfreude at this mess that he's found himself in. But that's sort of
[Amit Varma]: a digression. I found that chapter on your time in Manipur extremely fascinating. And
[Amit Varma]: one of the great insights there for me was when you quote what one of the IPAC directors
[Amit Varma]: told you at one point in time, Rishi Raj Singh, when you were in Punjab, he told you that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, working with the party, the party workers and all of that, he'd said, quote,
[Amit Varma]: it's like the army, not the traffic police, stop quote. Elaborate on that a bit because
[Guest]: this was a TIL for me. So the interesting component of being a political worker is that
[Guest]: you have to be on standby for most of your engagement. It's not a daily job. Like as
[Guest]: a traffic police, what you do is that you stand at a traffic signal and you direct traffic
[Guest]: every day. You are telling cars when to stop, when to go. And that is a constant thing.
[Guest]: You're doing it day in and day out. And you're doing it the entire year whenever you are
[Guest]: on duty. On the other hand, a political karakarta is someone who is in essentially like in the
[Guest]: army where you are training, where you are doing random exercises, you are doing random
[Guest]: things and you're waiting for the election period to come about. There is nothing for
[Guest]: a karakarta to do for four years and three months. It's literally a nine month engagement
[Guest]: that starts like or maximum of one year engagement. That's about it. So four years, you're disengaged
[Guest]: four years. You are doing your own thing, whatever you want. One year before the elections,
[Guest]: you get activated, but you have to maintain this kardar like the army needs to maintain
[Guest]: a troop. You are paying everyone's salaries. You're keeping them engaged. So what happens
[Guest]: in the army is that when a new general comes about, they make their entire troop do some
[Guest]: random exercises. It's literally things like, I don't know if you remember, but Narendra
[Guest]: Modi also did this when he came for the first time in 2014. He was like, oh, we are going
[Guest]: to clean up all the government offices. We're going to clean up all the files. So you had
[Guest]: visuals on TV where government officers were cleaning up all of their cupboards and cleaning
[Guest]: up the government offices. These are something that in politics we call engagement modules
[Guest]: because a lot of times there isn't any real work to be done. But if you don't give people
[Guest]: work, they become so disengaged that it's very difficult to get them back and get them
[Guest]: to start doing work. So you create fake work for them. And that fake work is essentially
[Guest]: just for their engagement. It's not doing anything to make you win an election. And
[Guest]: if you know anything about the army, a large part of commanding in the army is actually
[Guest]: keeping the troops busy in non-deployment periods in peacetime. You have people with
[Guest]: you on an army base in an area that is not under threat for most of their careers, but
[Guest]: they still need to stay fit. They need to stay active. They need to keep exercising.
[Guest]: But more than any of that, they need to not be bored and they need to be engaged. And
[Guest]: this insight I found to actually be invaluable because if you drop the engagement, if you
[Guest]: don't keep them busy, when you do require them, you're going to find it extremely difficult
[Guest]: to get them back on the job.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's interesting. And you know, it must be leading to that classic problem where
[Amit Varma]: party workers realize that they are in an engagement module, that the work they are
[Amit Varma]: doing is completely meaningless. Why the hell am I doing this? Elections are three years
[Amit Varma]: away. I'm sitting and doing whatever the hell it is. Whatever, I guess elections are motivation
[Guest]: enough and they do come about.
[Guest]: No, so good. Good part about that is that most party karakartas realize that this is
[Guest]: what their internal assessments are based on. If they are active during this, the leadership
[Guest]: will recognize them. So, interesting side parallel to this. So, Mulayam Singh Yadav,
[Guest]: when he used to be active in Uttar Pradesh and Mayawati's government was in power, every
[Guest]: month he used to do a statewide agitation on some issue or the other. And he really
[Guest]: did not care what the issue was. It could be something related to teachers. It could
[Guest]: be something related to pensions. It could be something related to bad roads. It could
[Guest]: be related to a corruption issue. It just did not matter. But on a monthly basis, he
[Guest]: announced a statewide thing. And the entire concept was to get the kardar out. And the
[Guest]: entire concept was just to like, for the kardar to know that, okay, the party exists, the
[Guest]: party is busy, and the party is doing something to come back to power. So don't go away, stay
[Guest]: in there. And I believe like this is a major lesson to be learned by like, say the Congress
[Guest]: party in the country right now, most of the kardar for the Congress, especially in the
[Guest]: states that I've worked in, doesn't know what they're supposed to be doing, they feel disengaged,
[Guest]: they feel like there is no direction in the party. So the party needs to strategize the
[Guest]: creation of random work for them to be engaged.
[Amit Varma]: Fascinating, random work, which could be anything at all. You know, one party should give an
[Amit Varma]: instruction to all these karyakartas that your work is to listen to Amit Verma's podcast,
[Amit Varma]: and we will ask you questions from it. And that's how you will be assessed. No, not happening
[Amit Varma]: anytime soon. Now, what's interesting about this little experiment, when you go down to
[Amit Varma]: Manipur, is that there are basically two people, you and Rajat Sethi, who was from Harvard
[Amit Varma]: and who had managed Assam for them earlier, who were kind of parachuted into the whole
[Amit Varma]: party machinery over there to look after things. But it was basically you because Rajat you
[Amit Varma]: said would like come once in a while. But otherwise, you were actually living there,
[Amit Varma]: and you were on the job. And immediately, you started doing all kinds of professional
[Amit Varma]: things like you say, you've written here quote, we hired a team of graphic designers, cartoonists
[Amit Varma]: and other campaign staff to manage the BJP social media for the next few months. We took
[Amit Varma]: control of all the party's official social media accounts from the local IT cell and
[Amit Varma]: started managing them from our office. We also got a few SIM cards and started making
[Amit Varma]: WhatsApp groups from the database of numbers that we were provided. Now, at an earlier
[Amit Varma]: point in time, you've also spoken about the data work that you did out there. Now, this
[Amit Varma]: is really getting fascinating that you're out there, you're moving into areas which
[Amit Varma]: all the other party workers who see you perhaps as an interloper or an outsider or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: they've never done, they don't get what's going on. But you realize that this is it,
[Amit Varma]: this is so incredibly critical. And as you point out what the BJP did, in terms of reaching
[Amit Varma]: out through WhatsApp and Facebook and Twitter, and the micro targeting that you did, the
[Amit Varma]: way that you use data, the way that you use WhatsApp was what made the difference. Because
[Amit Varma]: your opponent just used the traditional old school things that they know, but you managed
[Amit Varma]: to do a lot more. So take me through sort of what was your thinking when you go out
[Amit Varma]: there? How do you even strategize? And then what are the techniques you choose? Why do
[Amit Varma]: you think they will be effective? Why are they effective? What are the learnings from
[Guest]: the whole process?
[Guest]: So in politics, there are two parts to getting your message out. One is crafting the message.
[Guest]: The other part is creating a distribution channel. So both of these things need to happen
[Guest]: simultaneously. And your winning elections is dependent on it, because this is how you
[Guest]: shape reality for your voters. This is how you tell them why the other side is bad and
[Guest]: you are good. The first part of what your message should be is based on surveys and
[Guest]: focus groups, and the collection of people's problems and data and like weaknesses of the
[Guest]: other candidate. So that is happening on one side. On the second side, what you need to
[Guest]: do, you might have the best message, but if you can't take it to the right people, then
[Guest]: it's all useless. So you start creating these information dissemination mechanisms, which
[Guest]: is a lot of Facebook pages, which is a lot of these WhatsApp groups. But you also realize
[Guest]: that you can't reach everyone through the same Facebook page, largely because not everyone
[Guest]: is going to come and like your Facebook page. So the way to counter that, and BJP does it
[Guest]: extremely well, is that they create a lot of neutral looking pages. They create these
[Guest]: we support Indian Army, we support this, some Bollywood link pages, we support Narendra
[Guest]: Modi. So earlier, it was also done because it gave them plausible deniability for fake
[Guest]: news, because it would be, oh, some supporter is running it, we don't know who runs it.
[Guest]: Might be a BJP supporting page, but it's not an official BJP page. So a lot of these pages
[Guest]: get created. Like if you look at Nation with Namo, something like that right now, millions
[Guest]: of likes, millions of followers. Very rarely does anyone even talk about, okay, who funds
[Guest]: Nation with Namo? Who is this entity? And it's regularly hiring graphic designers, it's
[Guest]: regularly hiring people to do targeted marketing, and a huge operation in general. There were
[Guest]: also like a couple of pages on the Namo app itself, which were basically designed by private
[Guest]: entities separately. I know of different people who run social media teams, which run 100
[Guest]: to 150 different Facebook pages. So these dissemination mechanisms are important, and
[Guest]: they did not exist for the BJP in the Northeast. So when we got there, even before we knew
[Guest]: anything about the state and its politics, we started creating these mechanisms because
[Guest]: they take time. And it takes a lot of resources, you boost it up, you get the right people
[Guest]: who have the ability to write content that can go viral, that has the ability to like
[Guest]: resonate emotionally with people. So we were doing these exercises. On the other side,
[Guest]: we were also collecting data on the state's demographic, about the constituencies, about
[Guest]: what tribe votes were. Being Manipur, there are also some insurgent groups, so we were
[Guest]: collecting data on, okay, who supports which insurgent group, which candidate would an
[Guest]: insurgent group support if you gave them a ticket, things like that. So political parties
[Guest]: do take all of these things into account. We did this work for the first three, three
[Guest]: and a half months. By that time, we also got together a team of PhD students who started
[Guest]: compiling a chart sheet against the incumbent government. So that did two things. One, like
[Guest]: you get an excellent news day because you get to release a 100 point chart sheet against
[Guest]: the opposition. And the media covers it very well. You get something else too. Once you
[Guest]: created this chart sheet, you distribute it to all your party leaders, and all of them
[Guest]: are blaming the opposition for the exact same issues. You get them like a top 10 from it.
[Guest]: And at every speech, every social media post, they're repeating the same 10 things, all
[Guest]: of these leaders. So that reinforces the message. Another excellent side effect that we realized
[Guest]: was on a slow news day, when we didn't have any event lined up, we didn't have anything
[Guest]: lined up. We just got hold of some random MLA candidate or a famous like BJP Neta from
[Guest]: the area and told him, OK, call a press conference, read this page of the chart sheet. Tell them
[Guest]: what's wrong with the infrastructure development in the state. Tell them what's wrong with
[Guest]: corruption. Tell them what's wrong with human rights violation. And Manipur gave us a lot
[Guest]: of this content because it was a 15 year incumbent government. They weren't prepared for a blitzkrieg
[Guest]: campaign. So when all of these things started happening in succession, when these WhatsApp
[Guest]: forwards started going out, we'd also contacted all the newspapers because we've done this
[Guest]: before. We know how it works. So we had all the prime newspaper pages on the exact key
[Guest]: dates that mattered. So whenever like an ad day came out, like we had the front page,
[Guest]: they had like the second page, which doesn't really work very well because the first page
[Guest]: is what sticks in people's memories if it's strong enough. Their messaging essentially
[Guest]: also had to be like a pro incumbent message, which is much tougher to design. It's much
[Guest]: easier in politics to criticise than to like defend. Manipur also made me realise something
[Guest]: that an old enough government will always have skeletons in the closet. Tripura was
[Guest]: a different story because in Tripura, we could not make a 100 point chart sheet. The government
[Guest]: was so good that enough content did not exist. So we did make a chart sheet. We rebranded
[Guest]: it into something completely different from the Manipur one. But Manipur legit had a hundred
[Guest]: huge points of failure against the government. So it did that entire exercise. Another thing
[Guest]: that we did was we started reaching out to a lot of the journalists in Manipur. Very
[Guest]: funny thing has just happened. You might have seen it on Twitter, the largest newspaper
[Guest]: in Manipur, the guy that like I'd first got in touch with a newspaper called Sanghai Express.
[Guest]: That is the largest circulated newspaper there. That is what people trusted and read. So I'd
[Guest]: made friends with this guy. I reached out to him and talked to him about, okay, what
[Guest]: is it that you think? What is the content that you're planning on writing? And we'd
[Guest]: become like friends in a way. He's just joined BJP for the upcoming Manipur elections. So
[Guest]: yeah, a lot of these different things happen. The party leadership did not engage with us
[Guest]: for a very long time and we did not engage with them for one specific reason. As soon
[Guest]: as party people know that you are doing all of this, you are doing the surveys, you are
[Guest]: responsible for the data collection. You get a lot of flattery, but you also get a lot
[Guest]: of threats. A lot of people get after you telling you that, okay, this constituency,
[Guest]: you have to put this name in, even though that's not how it works.
[Guest]: There's someone in the field collecting the data and you are assessing it. They think
[Guest]: you will manipulate data and the survey results for them. So it just becomes a lot of pressure.
[Guest]: It becomes a lot of fakery. So like until it was like three months before the election,
[Guest]: we never engaged with the party leadership and the candidates themselves. We always routed
[Guest]: all the messaging through party leaders that we were in touch with.
[Amit Varma]: That's kind of fascinating, this little dance that you do. So I have another question here.
[Amit Varma]: One of the fascinating things about the Northeast was how you were crafting these individualized
[Amit Varma]: narratives for Manipur and Tripura, which has nothing to do with perhaps, you know,
[Amit Varma]: what the national narrative might be. Like at one point, you talk about how, you know,
[Amit Varma]: messaging needs to be short and memorable. And how you arrive at that is through local
[Amit Varma]: conditions, is through context. And you also point out, I think, in the context of Tripura
[Amit Varma]: that there was no talk of Bangladeshi immigrants, there was no talk of Hindu-Muslim rivalry,
[Amit Varma]: because that didn't play there. And although you haven't mentioned it, and it may not have
[Amit Varma]: been in this campaign, but I vaguely remember that at one point, the BJP while campaigning
[Amit Varma]: somewhere in the Northeast reassured the people that it's okay, you can eat beef, it's not
[Amit Varma]: a big deal, you guys can eat beef, we'll have a different stance elsewhere. So my question
[Amit Varma]: here is this, that the BJP seems to have built this incredible political machine, which,
[Amit Varma]: you know, which knows how to win elections. I mean, whether they eventually govern or
[Amit Varma]: not is a separate issue. But it's an incredible political machine, which knows how to win
[Amit Varma]: elections and does what it takes to win. And this, in my mind, creates this conflict between
[Amit Varma]: on the one hand, the will to power, that we'll do what it takes to win, you know, we'll take
[Amit Varma]: whatever stances get us a win, we'll buy people from the other party that we might have been
[Amit Varma]: against yesterday, we'll do whatever it takes. That's one part of it, the will to power.
[Amit Varma]: But the other part of it is that the BJP at its core does stand for something, you know,
[Amit Varma]: unlike the other parties, sort of, which could be blowing in the wind or trying to fill gaps
[Amit Varma]: that think exist in the marketplace, the BJP does stand for something, there is a core
[Amit Varma]: ideology, there is a core constituency, as such. And these two seem to be in conflict
[Amit Varma]: with each other. That's the one part of it I can't figure out. Because, you know, on
[Amit Varma]: the one hand, what is politics? Politics is, you know, downstream of culture, as Andrew
[Amit Varma]: Breitbart famously said, you know, it's supply responding to demand, what do the people want,
[Amit Varma]: you kind of give them that, you shape yourself accordingly. But equally, the BJP is pre-shaped
[Amit Varma]: in a particular way, which goes with a particular social current that's always been there, you
[Amit Varma]: know, I had an episode with Akshay Mukul on sort of the social evolution of Hindutva,
[Amit Varma]: and one with Vinay Sethapathi on the political evolution of the BJP. So they've kind of gone
[Amit Varma]: together and existed parallelly. But what do you make of this conflict? Because if politics
[Amit Varma]: becomes all about efficiency, how do I win the election, I'm going to do what it takes,
[Amit Varma]: you know, whatever gets me there is good. But on the other hand, do you also want to
[Amit Varma]: stand for something? What is your core identity? So is this a conflict that you kind of see
[Amit Varma]: playing out? Is there a sense within BJP within the workers, perhaps within, you know, strategists
[Amit Varma]: like Ram Madhava, who you've worked with, that, you know, there's a certain core thing
[Amit Varma]: we will never compromise on, but otherwise do what it takes.
[Guest]: So BJP within itself, I don't think the senior leadership has any conflict about this thing
[Guest]: at all. They are very pragmatic people in a lot of ways, and they're very clear on what
[Guest]: the path to their end goal is. So the way they've structured is that they will do anything
[Guest]: to come to power, no matter what the ideology required there. Once they are in power, they
[Guest]: will push their ideology down on the population. So it's a very efficient system in a way.
[Guest]: Marxists also from like a historic standpoint has always looked at power as a means of pushing
[Guest]: its ideological goals. So what that does is that it lets you compromise on ideology till
[Guest]: you are in power. Once you are in power, then you strengthen the ideology and make it the
[Guest]: dominant cultural stance of the population. So that is the way that it is structured.
[Guest]: So I don't think there is a major conflict there. What is very interesting though, and
[Guest]: like at a local level, if you look at it, the RSS is an extremely embracing organization.
[Guest]: Like if someone leaves, say, BJP right now and goes to the Congress or goes to the CPI,
[Guest]: there will be resistance within those parties. Everyone is going to be like, we can't accept
[Guest]: you. You're not ideologically pure kind of a thing. RSS, which you see as a very ideological
[Guest]: organization, BJP, which you see as a very ideological party, especially based around
[Guest]: Hindutva, is an entity that can embrace anyone and everyone. And it's structured that way
[Guest]: because this is the RSS culture from a really long period of time. They engage with people
[Guest]: who disagree with them, and then they slowly get you within their fold. They tell you how
[Guest]: nice they are as people and why you should convert to their ideology. So if you look
[Guest]: at someone like, say, Sindhya moving there, Jatin Prasad moving there, these people would
[Guest]: not be made to feel uncomfortable. They would instead be like senior leaders within the
[Guest]: BJP instantly and the RSS cadre will mollycoddle them and try to get them to shift their entire
[Guest]: stance and speeches to the RSS line and the Hindutva ideology. So it's a very efficient
[Guest]: way of doing things. The conflict might exist for someone outside, but within the leadership
[Amit Varma]: there is no conflict.
[Amit Varma]: My sense is that at some point it feels to me that something's gotta give. Like when
[Amit Varma]: Adityanath was made UP CM, for example, this was something that I think got commented upon.
[Amit Varma]: Like one of the ways in which they won in 2014, and Prashant Jha has a wonderful book
[Amit Varma]: on this, How the BJP Wins. He was also on my show. And one of the things that Amit Jha
[Amit Varma]: managed to do brilliantly, especially in UP, was reconfigure the caste dynamics, where
[Amit Varma]: they figured out that the OBC vote is gone, but they can appeal to the non-Yadav OBCs.
[Amit Varma]: The Dalit vote is gone, but they can appeal to the non-Jatav Dalits. And in fact, in both
[Amit Varma]: 2014 and 2019, more Dalits voted for the BJP than they did for any other party. And a natural
[Amit Varma]: expectation from that would have been that when they were appealing to all these different
[Amit Varma]: groups, that the eventual state government that would form in UP would be sort of a more
[Amit Varma]: inclusive one than you eventually got. Eventually you got Adityanath as the CM. And I think
[Amit Varma]: there was a faction within the party which said that, you know, I think one of the deputy
[Amit Varma]: CMs, was it Maurya, was OBC, so make him instead and whatever. And all those tussles were playing
[Amit Varma]: out. But no, they then just went with their guy. And it seems to me that at some point
[Amit Varma]: down the line, people are going to wisen up to it and something's got to give. But that's
[Amit Varma]: a little half-baked knowledge that I kind of have. Is there a greater insight that you
[Guest]: would add to this particular?
[Guest]: Yes, sir. So UP is an excellent example, because I've seen those elections pretty closely.
[Guest]: One thing that happened was when BJP came to power in 2014, and then in 2017, in the
[Guest]: UP state elections, a lot of this caste mapping and these caste-based WhatsApp groups happened.
[Guest]: Non-Jatav Dalits and non-Yadav OBCs were essentially told how the reservation benefits were cornered
[Guest]: by the dominant group within their sub-caste group, and why they should be voting for BJP
[Guest]: to get it back. Because if Samajwadi Party comes to power, it's always going to favour
[Guest]: the Yadavs within the OBC. If Mayawati comes to power, she'll favour the Jatavs within
[Guest]: the Dalit community. So the only one who will respect the other groups' rights within
[Guest]: these communities is BJP. If you look at 2019, though, that was actually not the case. So
[Guest]: all of the targeting, all of the data analytics, all of this declined heavily before the 2019
[Guest]: elections. 2019 was carpet bombing. It was entirely about Hindu, Muslim, India, Pakistan,
[Guest]: the strongman image and the nation and Balakot dominating the larger narrative than it was
[Guest]: about specific caste groups. What I have seen and what I believe to be the case is that
[Guest]: to come to power, they exploit the differences between communities. And once the BJP is in
[Guest]: power, the larger goal is to actually unify the Hindu community. And unifying the Hindu
[Guest]: community does involve vilifying the Muslim community and pitting the Hindu one against
[Guest]: the Muslim one. But the goal, even though BJP itself has a lot of like caste hierarchy
[Guest]: within it, even though RSS has huge caste hierarchies within it and is a decently casted
[Guest]: organisation, its vision for society is a consolidated Hindu identity. And I believe
[Guest]: like Adityanath, Yogi Adityanath in UP has worked on creating a unified Hindu identity.
[Guest]: How successful it is remains to be seen. Even if you look at the current elections, like
[Guest]: BJP elections are what four, five months away, there isn't as much casteist messaging happening
[Guest]: as it is like Hindu versus Muslim.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, in a sense, that's a kind of a political masterstroke, which I think 20 years ago,
[Amit Varma]: no one would have said that they can pull it off, that they can get all these disparate
[Amit Varma]: votes together and create this consolidated Hindu vote. And by the way, a digression here,
[Amit Varma]: like one of the criticisms I have of these other parties, and I don't know if it is a
[Amit Varma]: practical criticism, but it certainly I see playing out, is that many of the opposition
[Amit Varma]: parties also seem to be chasing this Hindu vote bank. You know, whether it's the Aam
[Amit Varma]: Aadmi Party, which did not take a strong enough stance against the abolition of 370, or in
[Amit Varma]: the case of CAA, and they do a lot of posturing about how devout they are and how Hindu they
[Amit Varma]: are. And similarly, the Congress also does a lot of soft Hindutva in different ways.
[Amit Varma]: So what is your sense of that? Do you feel that that is pragmatic, and they absolutely
[Amit Varma]: have to do that because there is no option that is a vote bank, you cannot but woo if
[Amit Varma]: you want to come to power? Or is it your sense that there is a lack of imagination there,
[Amit Varma]: that they see this block and they see that as a reality, and they are catering to that?
[Amit Varma]: Because what it strikes me from perhaps an idealistic perspective, is that look, people
[Amit Varma]: contain multitudes. You know, earlier, there might have been someone who said that I am
[Amit Varma]: a Yadav OBC, and I'll vote as, you know, according to this party, which is appealing to me on
[Amit Varma]: that regard. And the next day, he might say, no, no, no, Muslims are bad, Pakistan is a
[Amit Varma]: danger. I am now identifying as a Hindu. But the point is, there are many other shades
[Amit Varma]: of identity, which are not restricted to these two in particular. So are the other parties
[Amit Varma]: kind of doing the pragmatic thing? And is it necessary for everyone to appeal to that
[Amit Varma]: Hindu vote to survive in Indian politics? Or is it a lack of imagination that you can
[Amit Varma]: go beyond that? And you can look at other kinds of reconfigurations, ideally, of course,
[Amit Varma]: not based on identity at all? I mean, why? So what's your sort of take on this?
[Guest]: So yes, there is definitely a lack of imagination. But it's also because imagining and creating
[Guest]: new dynamics takes time. And for that, you need to come upon a theory of, okay, this
[Guest]: is the reconfiguration that I want to make. So I don't think anyone sat down and clearly
[Guest]: articulated what reconfiguration they would do in society. So they're not campaigning
[Guest]: towards that. But honestly, what the Congress is doing and what the Aam Aadmi Party is doing,
[Guest]: I don't see it as appealing to the Hindu vote bank at all. It's actually like at least looking
[Guest]: at the Delhi elections, it's quite a different thing. And it's a very sensible thing on the
[Guest]: part of Aam Aadmi Party from a political strategy perspective. By not speaking on these issues
[Guest]: of Hindu versus Muslim, they allowed for the election to be based around other issues.
[Guest]: Like they could talk about how they're giving free electricity, they could talk about how
[Guest]: they've bettered schools, they could talk about the free water that they're giving,
[Guest]: they could talk about mohalla clinics. If they did choose to speak on CA, if they did
[Guest]: choose to speak on Article 370, that is all the election would have been on and the BJP
[Guest]: machinery would have assured. Because so much of the media is controlled by BJP supporting
[Guest]: entities right now. That is what the nightly debate would have been on as soon as Aam Aadmi
[Guest]: Party gave a statement on the issue. All the editorials and newspapers would have been
[Guest]: on that issue. All of the political speeches that any BJP leader gave, even without Aam
[Guest]: Aadmi Party commenting, they were trying to present Aam Aadmi Party as someone who supports
[Guest]: those causes. So if Aam Aadmi Party did comment, that would have actually helped the BJP in
[Guest]: this sense. So not engaging with some of the issues that BJP plants and trying to create
[Guest]: your own issues is a valuable part of doing politics. The entire going out there and doing
[Guest]: overtly Hindu things to assert your Hindu identity, that might not be required. But
[Guest]: it is required to not engage with these issues if you want to create a different issue and
[Guest]: narrative for the election.
[Amit Varma]: So I get the pragmatism of framing the narrative, that you're right, that this is how they wanted
[Amit Varma]: to frame the narrative. They see themselves as a development party. So let's frame it
[Amit Varma]: that way. And let's frame it that way for practical political reasons. But I think the
[Amit Varma]: danger then is something that I referred to earlier in the context of the BJP, but something
[Amit Varma]: that I think is an issue with politics. And I'll make this segue to my next question.
[Amit Varma]: But basically, I think the broad issue there is that who is standing up for principles
[Amit Varma]: then? You know, if the Aam Aadmi Party and they are the one party in India that basically
[Amit Varma]: managed to be a disrupter that, you know, in terms of being a political entrepreneur,
[Amit Varma]: K. G. Rewald did a marvellous job, bring a new party out of nowhere, stand for something
[Amit Varma]: that people haven't stood for before, come to power, that's great. And therefore people
[Amit Varma]: had higher expectations from it as a party different from the others. But it seems to
[Amit Varma]: me that it's a party identical to the others in the sense that it's a will to power driving
[Amit Varma]: them, that they chose this particular decision, because from a political standpoint of what
[Amit Varma]: will help them frame the narrative, get the votes, blah, blah, blah. And the inference
[Amit Varma]: you draw from there is that they stand for nothing, that for all practical purposes,
[Amit Varma]: that they're a sociopathic party, they'll do what it does to come to power. And perhaps
[Amit Varma]: that's necessary. And sociopaths, by the way, it's a medical condition, your amygdala is
[Amit Varma]: damaged. So sociopaths are over represented in the criminal population, bankers and politicians.
[Amit Varma]: That's just a medical fact. I'd written a column on this once in which naively, I think
[Amit Varma]: in 2014 or 15, I had pointed out to Kejriwal as an exception and said, no, no, he seems
[Amit Varma]: to be well intentioned. But now I know he's as much of a sociopath as them. But then the
[Amit Varma]: point is that it's all incentives. It's all driven by will to power, that if you put Kejriwal
[Amit Varma]: and an identical context to Modi, he will be identical to Modi. The only difference
[Amit Varma]: being sort of perhaps their intelligence, but not their intent or not what they will
[Amit Varma]: actually do. And the question that I'm leading up to is that, is it then the case that politics
[Amit Varma]: always corrodes character, that you can get into politics, and you said you might one
[Amit Varma]: day get into politics. So perhaps it's a good question to ponder on, that you might get
[Amit Varma]: into politics with the best of intentions, that I care about the country, I'll change
[Amit Varma]: this, I'll do that. But the incentives of politics that you have to win elections, principles
[Amit Varma]: don't matter, you do what it takes, you have the dirtiest bedfellows, you may compromise
[Amit Varma]: after compromise after compromise. And initially, you can tell yourself that the end justifies
[Amit Varma]: the means. But that's a dangerous road to go down on. And eventually, I think if you
[Amit Varma]: compromise too much, you change, the person you are, is dependent on the things you do,
[Amit Varma]: no matter what you tell yourself while doing them. So is this something that you've thought
[Amit Varma]: about? Is this something that when you look at politicians around you, do you see signs
[Amit Varma]: of this? What's your sense of this?
[Guest]: Oh, definitely. So I think a lot about this. And even in a personal context, I think about
[Guest]: this. Principled politics in general, I haven't seen succeed in large part of this country
[Guest]: yet. There are pockets where it succeeded once and then completely evaporated. Manipur
[Guest]: again, great case study for this, because while we were in Manipur, we were also looking
[Guest]: at Erum Sharmila's campaign, who got 370 votes after months of efforts and fighting for the
[Guest]: cause of Manipur and the removal of AFSPA for 30 years. You get the support of 300 people,
[Guest]: 100 people. Other people in her party, there was a Muslim woman who was a lawyer who had
[Guest]: actually contested cases for about 1,000 to 1,500 different Muslim women within her community
[Guest]: who were suffering from different legal issues. She did not even get the vote of those 1,000
[Guest]: people. She got some 91 votes or something like that. So in general, like looking at
[Guest]: all of these people, looking at Jayaprakash Narayan of Lok Satta Party, you do start to
[Guest]: lose some amount of faith in principled politics just because you are seeing it fail again
[Guest]: and again and again. My sense of it is to do principled politics, you can't care about
[Guest]: power. So you can't care about the politics of it at all. You have to be someone, one
[Guest]: who is like financially secure enough to lead your own life that you don't need anything
[Guest]: out of politics. You are doing it because you want to do politics for the betterment
[Guest]: of the nation. You don't care about being in power. You care about the cause more. So
[Guest]: you are willing to say things that are principled but can cost you votes. If you start thinking
[Guest]: in calculative terms of votes and elections and winning, then you do become pragmatic
[Guest]: to the level of seeming like a sociopath in a lot of ways. A lot of politicians are that
[Guest]: way because that does get you votes and that does get you support, at least in the near
[Guest]: term. And elections are always in the near term, right? No one is planning for, I want
[Guest]: to win the elections 20 years later until then I am going to transform society. Most
[Guest]: people feel like I will do the pragmatic thing right now, come to power and then try to do
[Guest]: the principled thing. But you can't do the principled thing after coming to power because
[Guest]: then there is always the next election and you're scared about losing that and you're
[Guest]: scared about the party disintegrating and you're scared about losing all of the privileges
[Guest]: that you've circulated. So in general, very difficult place to be to do principled politics.
[Guest]: I believe you'd have to study philosophy and stoicism in general, get to the level of not
[Guest]: caring about winning or losing or even politics, just caring about the principles and then
[Guest]: doing politics.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and it'll be, I wonder if such a politician can survive. One of my favourite episodes
[Amit Varma]: of the show, by the way, is episode 149, A Life in Indian Politics, which I did with
[Amit Varma]: JP Narayan. And I mean, he's one of my modern heroes, a man I admire intensely, who didn't
[Amit Varma]: just sit in a corner and pontificate about politics should be like this or like that,
[Amit Varma]: but he jumped into the fray himself and he tried to change things and he didn't. You
[Amit Varma]: know, I mean, he did as long as the Lok Satha was a movement, but as a party, they couldn't
[Amit Varma]: really move the needle, which one cannot blame on him in any way, you know, both incredibly
[Amit Varma]: principled and incredibly pragmatic. And if he couldn't move the needle, you know, one
[Amit Varma]: wonders who can.
[Amit Varma]: Moving on to sort of the next question. And we've kind of mentioned WhatsApp before. And
[Amit Varma]: you know, in your book, in your first book, though in your second book, you elaborate
[Amit Varma]: much more on it. In your first book, you write, quote, during the 2014 general elections,
[Amit Varma]: WhatsApp was primarily used to create a network of party supporters and karyakartas with only
[Amit Varma]: about 9000 to 10,000 WhatsApp groups nationally. At that time, Facebook and Twitter were the
[Amit Varma]: primary social media channels that helped create the party's narrative and the party's
[Amit Varma]: energies and funds were directed towards these platforms. The potential of WhatsApp seems
[Amit Varma]: to have struck them only in early 2016, which is when the party began utilizing the platform
[Amit Varma]: for campaigning during assembly elections in all the states that went to polls. Today,
[Amit Varma]: WhatsApp has become a major part of the party's arsenal, with the party's IT cell head Amit
[Amit Varma]: Malviya even telling the Economic Times, the upcoming elections will be fought on the mobile
[Amit Varma]: phone. In a way, you could say they would be the WhatsApp elections, stop quote. And
[Amit Varma]: you wrote this, of course, a couple of years back, and it's it's only sort of grown and
[Amit Varma]: exacerbated since. And now you've also described in some detail on the kind of things you would
[Amit Varma]: do in WhatsApp, like you, of course, described in a lot of detail about the kind of micro
[Amit Varma]: targeting that you would do. And I would urge readers to check out sort of those passages
[Amit Varma]: from both your books where you talk about how Facebook data was used by both the Obama
[Amit Varma]: and Trump campaigns, incredibly fine tuned ways. I mean, one thinks if only Trump governed
[Amit Varma]: as well as he kind of campaigned or his team campaigned, if all these guys governed as
[Amit Varma]: well as a campaign, the world would be a different place. So tell me a little bit about this,
[Amit Varma]: because what strikes me about WhatsApp is that look, as far as it comes to Facebook
[Amit Varma]: on Twitter, I can see what you're doing. In theory, in practice, of course, I don't know
[Amit Varma]: what's happening in different silos all over the place. But all of Facebook is public,
[Amit Varma]: all of Twitter is public. On WhatsApp, you have shit happening, which people like me
[Amit Varma]: have no access to, you know. And one of the interesting things that you've mentioned is
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, anytime someone adds me to a WhatsApp group, which doesn't happen often,
[Amit Varma]: but anytime someone does it, I instantly leave. Because people like you and me, as you pointed
[Amit Varma]: out in your book, PLUs, we have an aversion to it. But you also pointed out that most
[Amit Varma]: voters across the country, they love it, because they feel they're getting to be part of an
[Amit Varma]: inside group, they are being able to access privileged information, which they can then
[Amit Varma]: share at their panwala or in their social circles, and their status goes up because
[Amit Varma]: they have this privileged information, which again, another one of those insights, which
[Amit Varma]: I hadn't even thought about till I kind of read your book. So tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: this WhatsApp ecosystem from two points of view. One is how does it really work at the
[Amit Varma]: consumption level at the people who are targeted and to as a level of someone who's actually
[Amit Varma]: created bots in cards created all these WhatsApp groups, the built narratives and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: What was that process like?
[Guest]: So I'll actually start with the second one, because the first one will make more sense
[Guest]: after that. So creating these groups was actually a lot easier in 2016 and 2017. Because WhatsApp
[Guest]: had no policies stopping anything, you could literally get SIM cards and create unlimited
[Guest]: WhatsApp groups with random numbers on there, like random segregated numbers, you could
[Guest]: have numbers of like people in a particular booth of a particular caste, or a particular
[Guest]: age group, or a particular demographic profile. So you could just get phone number lists like
[Guest]: that and keep creating WhatsApp groups. You had like a couple of admins made in there
[Guest]: who kept pumping content. And you could do it at a mass scale. This transformed in 2018,
[Guest]: because there was a huge human cry about WhatsApp funneling fake news and elections, these child
[Guest]: kidnapping rumours which led to murders in different villages. So there was a lot of
[Guest]: pressure on WhatsApp to act not just in India, but also in Brazil and in a couple of African
[Guest]: nations. And the US was basically targeting Facebook at that point of time on fake news
[Guest]: in other nations. So WhatsApp had to act, they changed policies, they made this five
[Guest]: forward limit, they started marking the messages as forwarded. These markings did nothing,
[Guest]: this forward limit does nothing. But there was one policy which most people did not notice
[Guest]: that made a major difference. If you buy a new SIM card, and you try to bulk create WhatsApp
[Guest]: groups, literally after the creation of two to three groups, your SIM card is going to
[Guest]: get blocked. So it is much more difficult to create WhatsApp groups as at bulk today
[Guest]: than it was in 2016 and 17. Most people that I talked to think this is a good thing. This
[Guest]: is actually a horrible thing. Because no one in the opposition was doing it at that point
[Guest]: of time, only the BJP was. Now the opposition is trying to do it, but they can't. So what
[Guest]: this does is this locks up the competitive advantage that BJP has on WhatsApp message
[Guest]: delivery forever. Because the previous group still exists. It's not like WhatsApp deleted
[Guest]: all the WhatsApp groups in 2018, and everyone was at zero. BJP still has 20 to 30 WhatsApp,
[Guest]: 1000 WhatsApp groups in the larger states of India, the opposition has like 1000, 2000.
[Guest]: So no matter how good their message might be, no matter how much the public would like
[Guest]: it, their message would not reach the public. So WhatsApp is majorly fueling this problem.
[Guest]: Creating WhatsApp groups also continue to get like more expensive as years went by,
[Guest]: and also more illegal in a lot of ways because earlier you could acquire legal SIM cards
[Guest]: and create a lot of groups. Now there are like troll farms in general who do a churning
[Guest]: of SIM cards. So they get a lot of SIM cards, create groups, let the numbers get blocked,
[Guest]: have multiple admins so that when this one is blocked, there is still one admin number
[Guest]: that you control and the group stays alive. So it's just a more expensive process. Now
[Guest]: it's a more specialized process now and can't happen at the same scale. When it comes to
[Guest]: the content component, most people get very happy when they are added to a news-based
[Guest]: WhatsApp group and a political WhatsApp group of a party that they support and they belong
[Guest]: to because they believe they're getting some information that other people don't have access
[Guest]: to. And a lot of times they do get information that other people don't have access to, but
[Guest]: a lot of times it's fake information and it's fake news that they keep getting on these
[Guest]: groups. But because it's unique information, because they think it's important, they circulate
[Guest]: it to their other contacts. They forward it to whoever they know, their friends, their
[Guest]: relatives, their family WhatsApp groups. And from there it just exponentially spirals out.
[Guest]: So there's this very interesting calculation that even with just the five forward limit
[Guest]: and with WhatsApp groups of only 20 people, it would only take five raised to the power
[Guest]: of five. So like five people forwarding it to five more groups with 20 people within
[Guest]: two cycles, it will reach four to 6 million people. So what that essentially means is
[Guest]: that even five forwards is a lot and 20 people in a group is a lot because these things grow
[Guest]: exponentially. The spread is extremely fast if all the people in there are forwarding
[Guest]: it. Content consumption on WhatsApp has changed in a lot of ways because I do see some saturation
[Guest]: coming in. This thing that I wrote about people becoming very happy, this is going down because
[Guest]: more and more people are being added to more and more groups. The groups are getting busier.
[Guest]: There is more content being pumped by all sides, all parties. There's more advertising
[Guest]: happening on WhatsApp with surprisingly like bank messages are coming on WhatsApp slowly.
[Guest]: Marketing people are realizing how they can do these bulk WhatsApp forward. So they've
[Guest]: started doing it. This is decreasing the efficacy of WhatsApp, which might be a great thing
[Guest]: in a lot of ways. Fake news is also a phenomenon that more and more people know about. So ultimately
[Guest]: at a cognitive level, a time might come, it's still far away, but a time might come where
[Guest]: people just stop absorbing content altogether. Fake, real, it doesn't matter. They just stopped
[Guest]: listening to everything. That's how full of it they are. And that might be a good thing
[Amit Varma]: for democracy. We don't know.
[Amit Varma]: So that extremely bleak image of there is so much content I cannot consume anymore actually
[Amit Varma]: might work in our favor. I also think that, you know, while it appears kind of pessimistic,
[Amit Varma]: it's actually perhaps too optimistic. There are a lot of insights about, you know, why
[Amit Varma]: people believe this shit in the first place. Like there's of course stuff that we already
[Amit Varma]: know that people will believe anything that lines up with their biases and then they'll
[Amit Varma]: get invested in it. And if you then try to disprove it or dispute it, they'll take it
[Amit Varma]: as a personal attack. It's no longer a question of what is true or what is not true.
[Amit Varma]: Another interesting advice was that fake news and clarification circulate in different groups.
[Amit Varma]: So if there is some fake news that has spread across thousands of unknown WhatsApp groups,
[Amit Varma]: which none of us have access to, and has also come on the public domain and so-called neutral
[Amit Varma]: Facebook sites, but we know who runs them and say the good Pratik or Fault News or,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Boom Live and they do a fact check and all that. Their fact check is circulating
[Amit Varma]: in a very limited group of really different people and the damage is already done. Like
[Amit Varma]: one classic example that you've given is a 2018 video of which Koyna Mitra among others
[Amit Varma]: forwarded which perpetrated to be a Naga sadhu being beaten up by Muslims. And that obviously
[Amit Varma]: spread like wildfire all over. And by the time the fact check came that hey, it's not
[Amit Varma]: a Hindu Muslim thing. The guy getting beaten up was a drunkard who had entered a house
[Amit Varma]: and was trying to molest a woman. And that woman's brother then came and he was beating
[Amit Varma]: him up. And that is a context. And they're both Hindu. You know, it's too late. Nobody
[Amit Varma]: kind of gets that. And as you've pointed out that there is a lot of left wing fake news
[Amit Varma]: also and you've given examples of that. Now, here's my question. You talk about one, there
[Amit Varma]: is a worry of a virtual arms race phrase you use in your book, which I thought was superbly
[Amit Varma]: evocative. Also, as you point out now that the change in rules that, you know, SIM cards
[Amit Varma]: get blocked and all of that has created has sort of solidified this imbalance where the
[Amit Varma]: BJP has so many groups and the others don't have so many groups. And the implication in
[Amit Varma]: that is that other people should also do a similar kind of narrative control in the sense
[Amit Varma]: that the truth doesn't matter. As you explained, people don't care about logic or reasoning
[Amit Varma]: or whatever. They believe what they want to believe. And therefore, all the opposition
[Amit Varma]: parties should also get in there and they should run their own narrative factories and
[Amit Varma]: try to counter at that level. And that makes me really uneasy. Like one of the things that
[Amit Varma]: I have seen is that I know the BJP IT cell is vile and I've been attacked by them in
[Amit Varma]: the past till I blocked all of them, I hope. But I have also been attacked by the Congress
[Amit Varma]: IT cell when I have expressed my dissatisfaction with the Gandhi's. And even Aam Aadmi Party
[Amit Varma]: got after me at a different point in time, though I have a different Aam Aadmi Party
[Amit Varma]: leaders I admire on my show. It's almost like it's a race to the bottom. And that's what
[Amit Varma]: kind of disheartens me that it doesn't have to be a race to the bottom. That maybe one
[Amit Varma]: differentiator can be that you take a high moral ground. But that's regarding IT cells.
[Amit Varma]: But regarding narratives, do you feel that there is no option? Do you feel that we are
[Amit Varma]: reaching a stage where the parties have to say that truth jaaye bhaad mein? You know,
[Amit Varma]: these guys are building a narrative that suits them. We have to build a narrative that suits
[Amit Varma]: us. And it's war and what the facts are and what the truth is, who gives a shit. And then
[Amit Varma]: everything gets extreme and partisan. And nobody is voting any more than on principles
[Amit Varma]: and policies and issues and so on. They are just voting based on the tribe.
[Guest]: So that isn't necessary at all. In fact, truth might be an excellent thing to base all narratives
[Guest]: and campaigns for your side on. The issue is thinking truth will sell itself. If you
[Guest]: release a fact check, you've written a fact check, and you think you've done your job
[Guest]: and it's going to create like, it's going to correct everything, it's going to fix the
[Guest]: fake news, it's going to fix the people who forwarded the fake WhatsApp news. It's not.
[Guest]: So even if you are on the side of the high moral ground, even if you are on the side
[Guest]: of the truth, and all you ever circulate is the truth, you need distribution. If your
[Guest]: truth just stays with you in your heart, it's not going to make a difference from like a
[Guest]: political and like democratic perspective. For a democracy to function, your truth needs
[Guest]: to reach at least as many people as the lie is reaching. And that involves a lot of effort.
[Guest]: What is happening right now is that okay, like all of the parties have created their
[Guest]: own IT cells, a lot of them are trolling different people. But even the politicians who are taking
[Guest]: high moral grounds, who are saying the truth, who are on side of like things that are in
[Guest]: the benefit of the nation as a whole, which are not dividing different communities, those
[Guest]: people might not be known entities right now. And they can't just bank upon the fact that
[Guest]: they're supporting what is right, they will have to put in the energy of propagating their
[Guest]: rightful narrative. So ultimately, the tools that we especially mentioned in the second
[Guest]: book about like, how these silos are created, and how silos are unified, and how messages
[Guest]: are propagated and spread and how you get people to believe a conjured reality. That
[Guest]: entire thing is very important, even for people who are spreading the truth. Because you have
[Guest]: to do the exact same actions to build a reality in facts as you have to do to build a reality
[Guest]: that is completely fake.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, I totally get that, that you can go with the truth, just package it well. But
[Amit Varma]: sometimes I wonder how package it well, for example, look at Trump, right? When Trump
[Amit Varma]: won in 2016, I remember I wrote a column at the time, arguing that one of the reasons
[Amit Varma]: he would do well is that his narratives were really simple. They were wrong, but they were
[Amit Varma]: simple. For example, you know, middle America was losing jobs, and there was an employment
[Amit Varma]: problem there. And he came up with two answers. One, he said that the immigrants are coming
[Amit Varma]: and taking away your job. So you know, anti immigration message. And the other he said,
[Amit Varma]: your jobs are getting shipped to China. So anti free trade message, and you've demonized
[Amit Varma]: China and immigrants. And that's a simple narrative that sells. Now, it's wrong. But
[Amit Varma]: the truth is far more complex. And to package that complex truth in a simple way which people
[Amit Varma]: can get behind, and which can motivate people becomes incredibly difficult. The other thing
[Amit Varma]: as the German theorist Carl Schmitt once said is that in politics, you need an other. Now,
[Amit Varma]: these gooey feelings of love and brotherhood is not going to motivate anyone to go to the
[Amit Varma]: voting booth and vote for someone. What the BJP has done brilliantly is if they've, they've
[Amit Varma]: always had that other, but now they've, you know, other is the other even more as it were,
[Amit Varma]: and that drives a vote there. Now, you know, what are other parties to do? That is the
[Amit Varma]: strongest narrative. Do you have to create another? How do you do that? Do you have to
[Amit Varma]: create a narrative based on hate if that motivates people more than love? You know, do you have
[Amit Varma]: to ignore the truth if the truth is too complex? These are the sort of issues that kind of
[Guest]: worry me.
[Guest]: So that is an excellent thing to worry about. But as you mentioned the Trump example, great
[Guest]: one. Here you don't try to counter Trump's narrative by trying to supply truth and facts
[Guest]: because that is a very messy thing to do. And it is a debate. The way to beat Donald
[Guest]: Trump was never to engage with that rhetoric at all. It was always to create another narrative
[Guest]: entirely that would demolish Donald Trump. And it could be based entirely on the truth.
[Guest]: Things like how Donald Trump is a failed businessman, which like all of us knew was fact. Like now
[Guest]: we know even more because the tax returns have come out. You build it on how many times
[Guest]: he's declared bankruptcy and defrauded banks and the American taxpayer. You build it on
[Guest]: his personal character and like how he has been against Christian values all his life.
[Guest]: So you use the truth that you can use against him. But if you think that the truth will
[Guest]: win in an emotive battle, it will not.
[Amit Varma]: That's excellently put. You know, I've taken up most of the time and we have some 15-20
[Amit Varma]: minutes of the time you promised me. So I don't want to take up much more, which is
[Amit Varma]: probably a good thing because I want people to buy both books and read both of them. What
[Amit Varma]: we discussed mostly is really the material of your first book, which I must confess I
[Amit Varma]: found way more fascinating because Indian politics is just such a deep, fascinating
[Amit Varma]: subject that if the book was like five times longer, I would have, you know, still read
[Amit Varma]: it in the one sitting I did read it in. But now, you know, I want to do a little bit of
[Amit Varma]: justice to your excellent second book, The Art of Conjuring Alternate Realities. So what
[Amit Varma]: got you to, you know, focusing on this book? Like, of course, you know, while you were
[Amit Varma]: doing party work at, you know, it was all about narratives and they weren't necessarily
[Amit Varma]: alternate narratives. It's just a question of like choosing what to focus on and what
[Amit Varma]: brand to push or whatever. But at some level, it is alternate narrative. Like when you paint,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Maharaj Amrindar Singh is Captain Amrindar Singh, people's man have coffee with
[Amit Varma]: Captain how many people can actually go and have coffee with Captain, right? So there's
[Amit Varma]: a little bit of alternative in there. So tell me about this kind of book. And I wish we
[Amit Varma]: could talk more about it. Because one of the things I loved about the book, which readers
[Amit Varma]: should really check out is all these lovely stories that you've thrown in which we can
[Amit Varma]: all relate to like Vishwamitra and Vashishta and all the alternate realities that are happening
[Amit Varma]: there. So it's it's great fun to read as well. But, you know, rather than focus on any aspect
[Amit Varma]: of it, what brought you to writing this book, the content of the book can be divided in
[Amit Varma]: two parts, and neither of which are easy to summarize, or one is possibly easier than
[Amit Varma]: the other. The part that's hard to summarize is, of course, the whole ecosystem of building
[Amit Varma]: alternate realities, what are the different ways in which you create stories, which people
[Amit Varma]: believe why they believe what they believe all of it is fascinating and extremely hard
[Amit Varma]: to summarize. So I won't ask you to really try to summarize it unless you have a really
[Amit Varma]: pithy way of kind of doing that. But the other more important thing, which I think would
[Amit Varma]: be a good space to end is what do we do about this? You know, what are your sort of policy
[Amit Varma]: solutions which you can put on the table? What can we do about this? And given that
[Amit Varma]: the party in power has a most vested interest in keeping it going, because that's how they've
[Amit Varma]: got to power. And that's how they can strengthen their hold on power. You know, are you optimistic
[Amit Varma]: about all of that happening? Sorry, many questions packed in one. Let's start with the personal
[Amit Varma]: one. What brought you to writing this book? And what is the process of writing these two
[Amit Varma]: books been like, if I might digress there, like, you know, they've come out within a
[Amit Varma]: short span of time, you obviously write fast. What's your work ethic like? Like, has it
[Amit Varma]: been easy? Has it been tough? How did you discover your voice?
[Guest]: Starting with how the second one came about? Essentially, I met this guy called Anand Venkat
[Guest]: Narayanan. The book is co-authored with him. He's a cybersecurity researcher based in Bangalore.
[Guest]: So we actually met at a cybersecurity conference. And he was talking about Aadhar and data in
[Guest]: general, and how data can be used against nation states, and can basically destabilize
[Guest]: entire nations if they fall into the wrong hands. And I was talking about elections and
[Guest]: politics and things like that. So we stayed in touch. And over the years, we've been discussing
[Guest]: a lot around what do the rise of social media giants mean? What does it mean that people's
[Guest]: reality is based on the information that they receive on their mobile screen, and they have
[Guest]: no way to get information from any other source? What does it mean that even nation power is
[Guest]: based around the narrative that a nation is able to create, instead of being based on like
[Guest]: military strength, or just the amount of money that they have? The conflict between nation
[Guest]: states, especially like the US and China right now, we got into this discussion about how that
[Guest]: is going to be influenced by which nation out of these two countries choose to support.
[Guest]: So China is selling a model of fast economic growth, and you don't need democracy in Africa
[Guest]: right now and Belt and Road across the entire Central Asian continent, and then Europe,
[Guest]: it is telling nations that support us because faster economic growth. The US model, on the
[Guest]: other hand, is that they have this narrative of liberty and justice and democracy. And they're
[Guest]: like, you should support our cause for world freedom. So it is to a certain degree, also an
[Guest]: informational conflict between nation states. It plays out in a lot of ways similar to how
[Guest]: conflicts between political parties play out within a democracy. And surprisingly, we realized
[Guest]: it's also similar to how religious government work and how essentially cyber scammers work,
[Guest]: because all these entities are trying to convince you of a competing reality.
[Guest]: Their goal is to get into your mind enough to shape your truth, to shape your reality.
[Guest]: And discussing this over time, we realized that there are specific methods to do it.
[Guest]: Good part for us was that cognitive security and just like mental cyber security is a major
[Guest]: thing that the Russians have studied for a really long time. During the Cold War,
[Guest]: especially when the KGB used to exist, they wrote a lot of manuals on manipulating people,
[Guest]: manipulating media, manipulating thought in general. And there are also cyber entities
[Guest]: in the world right now, who've realized that instead of trying to hack a system,
[Guest]: it is easier to hack people's minds. So we covered the nuclear reactor hack at Kodankulam.
[Guest]: And we realized that the North Korean people who hacked, will not say state actors. That's
[Guest]: not conclusively proven, but the entity from North Korea that actually hacked the nuclear
[Guest]: power plant, they did not do it by sophisticated programming. They actually did it by studying
[Guest]: the two nuclear scientists there and realizing what kind of a link they would click on.
[Guest]: Then they were sent a completely fictitious paper on thorium nuclear research that would
[Guest]: pique their interest by the very title and the email. Very well crafted. As soon as they clicked
[Guest]: on it, a malware was downloaded. Then they plugged their drive into the nuclear reactor,
[Guest]: which is air-gapped. It's not connected to the internet. So there is no way to hack it.
[Guest]: So we realized just hacking people's brains and creating a reality for them has vast usages across
[Guest]: sectors. And politics is a very micro study of it because you get to see it at an individual voter
[Guest]: level. And then there is a geopolitical aspect to it that Anand was working on and studying at
[Guest]: that point of time. So we decided it's worthwhile to actually sit and research on how realities are
[Guest]: shaped. Are there common themes? Are there common techniques that all of these people use? And there
[Guest]: were a lot of common techniques. So the book came together well. Writing process for the first book,
[Guest]: I would say was much easier because in general, that is my story. That is me telling my life
[Guest]: story. And I was also freer then because I just resigned. I did not have a job. Now I'm working,
[Guest]: I have consistent work. So the second book took longer. But for me, the second one was actually
[Guest]: more interesting because I got to learn a lot. I got to study a lot. We got feedback on it. If
[Guest]: you see the endorsements, then it's from an intelligence officer at the US Pentagon. Another
[Guest]: one is from an intelligence officer from the Royal Air Force, UK, who's also worked as an advisor to
[Guest]: UK's prime minister on defense modernization. The third one is from a friend in the Indian
[Guest]: security establishment who worked with the NDRO and now works with the Australian Intelligence
[Guest]: Institute. So just meeting all of these people, talking to them about geopolitical conflicts and
[Guest]: shaping reality and cybersecurity, a lot more fun for me personally, a lot tougher to write.
[Amit Varma]: It's all very fascinating. And you spoke about hacking minds. I remember I was sitting with my
[Amit Varma]: friend Nitin Pai of the Takshashila Institution a long time back and we were chatting about
[Amit Varma]: the allegations about the EVMs being hacked. And Nitin said something that stuck with me is that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, why would they want to hack machines, it's much easier to hack minds. And your book
[Amit Varma]: Innocence is a blueprint of how to do that, which is fascinating, and everyone should read it. And
[Amit Varma]: you know, and everyone should also read it because we all seem to think that the rest of the world is
[Amit Varma]: stupid, not me. Now, I will never get fooled by anyone. But the point is, all of us have biases,
[Amit Varma]: all of us have certain things we want to believe. So you know, all of us can be lonely at times.
[Amit Varma]: And some of these stories are very alluring, like you said, the whole community factor,
[Amit Varma]: someone is connecting with me, all of that. So we should all I think, read it, partly for that
[Amit Varma]: reason, just to understand human nature a little better, because that is really at the core of it.
[Amit Varma]: It's not about information. It's about human nature is this way. And therefore people can
[Amit Varma]: manipulate it in all these really interesting ways. The second part of that question, then
[Amit Varma]: is, you know, what can be done to sort of change this, which is a much broader question, because
[Amit Varma]: it's technology that enables it. It's technology that enables it through algorithms, which actually
[Amit Varma]: there's no reason to object to them at a principal level. Like if I am to say that as an individual,
[Amit Varma]: it is my right to be served by a company which is giving me the kind of content I want to read,
[Amit Varma]: who is anyone to stand in my way, but clearly something has to be done. Now you've mentioned
[Amit Varma]: that WhatsApp did a few things and the SIM card thing is great. And although you know,
[Amit Varma]: it might sort of perpetuate the imbalance that is already there. And it has those little things
[Amit Varma]: like forwarded message and all of that. But broadly at a policy level, being a policy person
[Amit Varma]: yourself also along with the politics person, what would you say can be done about this
[Amit Varma]: realistically, in the sense that one can make a public case for something like this, and there
[Amit Varma]: is a chance that people in power will actually put it in practice? So this question is actually
[Guest]: something that is bothering all the multi-billion dollar corporations right now. It's a question
[Guest]: that's bothering all national governments across the world right now. It's bothering every democracy,
[Guest]: it's bothering every intelligence agency. How do you protect your society and your population from
[Guest]: just this mental manipulation? So it's a very tricky question because Facebook, WhatsApp,
[Guest]: all of these entities owned by the Facebook group, Twitter itself, TikTok,
[Guest]: they're profit maximizing entities. And for that purpose, they've all done some degree of
[Guest]: evilness where they've knowingly let people get mentally harmed. So as the recent whistleblower
[Guest]: report from Facebook just stated, they knew that girls in a certain demographic age group were
[Guest]: getting into severe depression because of Instagram content. And they tried to suppress
[Guest]: that report and actually did successfully suppress it. So these things, they also,
[Guest]: Facebook has done a lot of research into manipulating people using its own platform. So
[Guest]: historically, Facebook has experimented on how they can manipulate people using Facebook. We
[Guest]: are guinea pigs to the platform historically. They've collected all of this data, they've not
[Guest]: released it, they've tried to hide a lot of it. So it is not great history there. But if you look
[Guest]: at these entities at this point of time, I truly believe they are trying to solve the problem
[Guest]: because it's just bad for business to get so much scrutiny. If you look at the world today,
[Guest]: everyone is talking about how bad the social media giants are, how fake news is spreading
[Guest]: rapidly, how democracy is getting destroyed because of it. So solutions at a technological
[Guest]: level when these multi-billion and trillion dollar corporations get involved is something that is
[Guest]: likely. I believe it will come at an algorithmic level, but I also believe what is going to happen
[Guest]: is that eventually we will have trust scores. For a lot of content that gets circulated,
[Guest]: you could easily build something that gives it a trust score. If it's a news website,
[Guest]: you could tabulate how many times fact checkers like a global group of fact checkers have
[Guest]: identified this entity as circulating fake news. You could potentially design algorithms that then
[Guest]: mark the separate links and separate pieces of content as, okay, this might be untrustworthy
[Guest]: because the source has circulated fake news so many times in the past. Do you want to visit
[Guest]: this page and see their history? Something like that is something that could also help.
[Guest]: But ultimately, I don't think any of these is a solution. I think the solution lies in recreating
[Guest]: society to be more resilient as a whole. It does lie in education. It's a long-term thing and I
[Guest]: know educational and long-term solutions don't do well for a lot of things. But studying societies
[Guest]: across the world, you find out that not every society is equally vulnerable. India is extremely
[Guest]: vulnerable to a lot of divide within our own community. The US is extremely vulnerable in
[Guest]: believing different conspiracy theories and people believe in different rhetoric against
[Guest]: different groups. But you look at a place like Europe, then it's slightly more resilient.
[Guest]: If you look at Australia, it's slightly more resilient than Europe. If you look at Scandinavia,
[Guest]: it's extremely resilient. Then you have countries like Switzerland, which are surprisingly and
[Guest]: like just uncannily resilient to these sorts of manipulation. So society and social level
[Guest]: of education and understanding does have a major role to play on this. What we believe is that
[Guest]: Indian culture in general has a huge advantage when you look at traditional Indian culture,
[Guest]: because it has been a questioning culture. We are reinterpreting it to be a culture that is
[Guest]: hardline, that believes in Hindutva. But the culture has always been based around debate.
[Guest]: It's based around discussion. If you look at even the Hindu religion, then like there used to be
[Guest]: Shastrath, there used to be debates between different schools of philosophy within the
[Guest]: religious movement. Between Buddhism and Hinduism, there have been large debates.
[Guest]: So India has been a questioning society. India has been a society that's been sceptical of what
[Guest]: is told to them by just an authority figure or by a WhatsApp forward. We've lost this in, say,
[Guest]: the past 100, 200, 300 years. We have to start recreating that within our society.
[Guest]: So the school system has a major part to play here. The social groups that we are surrounded
[Guest]: by have a major part to play here. What is important is that we recognise the problem first,
[Guest]: and then we explain the problem to other people without explaining it in the context of, say,
[Guest]: BJP and Congress, without explaining it in the context of their caste group versus another caste
[Guest]: group, Hindu versus Muslim. That's why, if you look at the book, we have examples of manipulation
[Guest]: from both sides. We actually focus on Iran using the divide and discontent within Indian Muslim
[Guest]: youth to create more dissatisfaction and combine the Indian Muslim youth to its own cause.
[Guest]: And Iran wasn't doing it because it has some geopolitical interest in doing it. It was
[Guest]: literally doing it as an experiment in India. So once you understand what kind of geopolitical
[Guest]: risk it presents, as anyone who cares about the nation, you will become someone who wants
[Guest]: to fix the problem instead of making it into a political issue. Fantastic thoughts. And you
[Amit Varma]: mentioned that, you know, Indian society has been sceptical in the past. I'll be a little
[Amit Varma]: sceptical of that assertion when you talk about the traditions within Hinduism and say that
[Amit Varma]: I would argue that they were probably only among the elites, as it were, the questioning,
[Amit Varma]: the Shastrath and so on. I'm not sure how widespread they are, but that we'll never
[Amit Varma]: know really, because the history written of that time would largely be by the elites for the elites.
[Amit Varma]: So who knows? I'm also reminded when you were, you know, you used the word experiment and that
[Amit Varma]: reminded me of this experiment you've written about in the book, I think Facebook carried it
[Amit Varma]: out in 2012 or something, where, you know, one set of readers was for one week shown happy messages
[Amit Varma]: and another set was shown sad messages. And they wanted to see at the end of this time,
[Amit Varma]: what kind of posts these two groups will make. And lo and behold, the group with the happy messages
[Amit Varma]: actually started posting happy messages and the other way around, which means they actually made
[Amit Varma]: people sadder. And the great lesson in that is that we are not as much in control of ourselves
[Amit Varma]: as we think that we are, that we are all the time being willfully and otherwise being manipulated by
[Amit Varma]: everything that happens to us, that whatever we are right now, whatever we feel right now is
[Amit Varma]: contingent on so many things, all the information we take in the media, we take in the food that we
[Amit Varma]: eat, the chemical balance in our brain, which could be sort of happenstance. So, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I think many of us need to lose a little bit of arrogance and gain humility about how fragile
[Amit Varma]: human nature can be and therefore take problems like this seriously. But so to finally bring an
[Amit Varma]: episode to the end, a final question for you, and this is really for the benefit of my listeners as
[Amit Varma]: well as me. If you had to recommend a handful of books which you feel shaped you and that everyone
[Guest]: should read, what would they be? So one I definitely recommend is something called
[Guest]: The Dictator's Handbook. Bruce Bueno de Mosqueda, he's a professor at NYU who explores how dictators
[Guest]: stay in power. So that book shaped a lot of my thought in life in general. A book completely
[Guest]: unlinked to politics, but extremely linked to how people think is a psychology of money. Morgan
[Guest]: Housel just read it. I realized that even at a financial and investing level, like all of us have
[Guest]: too many biases, and it's important to assess the biases in all fields of life. And when you do it
[Guest]: in a field that you don't work in, you realize how bad you are. So in politics, I'm less equipped to
[Guest]: judge my bias than I am in finance. Reading that gave me a perspective on, okay, the bias exists.
[Guest]: One interesting book that I'm reading right now is actually Josie Joseph's book.
[Guest]: It's an incredibly scary read, and you realize how like the deep state in India has existed and
[Guest]: vilified people in general throughout the process. I know you talked to Josie in a podcast recently,
[Guest]: so that is an absolute must read. I also think reading just about, say, philosophy and stoicism
[Guest]: and stoicism is something that I've just started reading on because I actually now believe that
[Guest]: it's important to be a stoic if you want to do anything good in politics. You can't care about
[Guest]: winning elections, you just do what you want to do. So Marcus Aurelius would be a good one to
[Guest]: start on there. Epictetus, another excellent one, but yeah, philosophy. Wow, fantastic
[Amit Varma]: recommendations. And Shivam, thank you so much for your time today and for writing these two
[Amit Varma]: wonderful books. And I can't wait to see what you do next, frankly. So thank you again for your time
[Guest]: and insights. Thank you. Extremely great talking to you.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.